Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 10: Financial Function

===== PDF PAGE 101 (book page 99) =====
FINANCIAL FUNCTION
1. Introduction
There is a tendency in the business world to say
that the bottom line (or profit) should not be the only
focus of the business and that there should rather
be greater emphasis on Triple Bottom line reporting.
Triple bottom line reporting (also known as Integrated
reporting) requires the business to look at the
following three issues when reporting on how well
the business has performed:
•  People
•  Planet
•  Profit
Although the importance of looking after people and
the planet is not denied in this chapter, the reality is
that no business will be able to uplift the community
in which it operates or look after the environment,
unless it is making a profit. The emphasis of this
chapter is on the financial well-being of the business.
Shareholders and other investors are particularly
interested in the financial performance of the
business during the last financial year, as this
will tell them if their money is generating a ROI
(return on investment). But financial forecasting is
equally important as this predicts if the business
will be profitable in the immediate future. In order
to understand the financial performance (past,
present and future) of a business, it is important to
understand the two basic financial statements of a
business, namely:
•  The Income Statement or the new term used:
The Statement of Comprehensive Income
and
•  The Balance Sheet or as it is now known:
The Statement of Financial Position.
Activity 1
Critically discuss the following statement in pairs:
A business that focuses on profit will harm the environment and other stakeholders.
2. A basic interpretation
of The Statement of
Comprehensive Income
and The Statement of
Financial Position:
•  The Statement of Comprehensive Income is
used to calculate the net profit of the business
for the financial year.
◊  All income - all expenses = net profit.
◊  If it is a Sole Trader or Partnership, the
business will not pay tax as the owner pays
tax in his/her personal capacity. There
is, therefore, no indication of tax on the
Statement of Comprehensive Income given
on the next page.
===== PDF PAGE 102 (book page 100) =====
2.1 The Statement of Comprehensive Income
Lion and Tiger
Statement of Comprehensive Income of for the year ending 31 December 2020
Turnover (Sales minus debtors allowances) 190 150
- Cost of Sales (33 797)
= Gross profit 156 353
+ Operating Income 9 000
Rent Income 9 000
= Gross operating Income 165 353
- Operating Expenses (73 119)
Water and Electricity 6 100
Wages 19 555
Telephone 1 523
Stationery 900
Salaries 21 321
Packing material 3 121
Donations 1 500
Depreciation 3 005
Advertising 16 094
= Operating Profit 92 234
+ Interest Income 600
= Profit before Interest Expense 92 834
- Interest Expense (134)
= Net Profit 92 700
===== PDF PAGE 103 (book page 101) =====
2.2 The Statement of Financial Position
Lion and Tiger
Statement of Financial Position on 31 December 2020
Notes 31 Dec 2020
ASSETS
Non-Current Assets 796 125
Property, Plant and Equipment 2 780 125
Fixed deposit: Strong Bank 16 000
Current Assets 199 000
Inventory 3 106 000
Trade and Receivables 69 000
Cash and Cash Equivalents 4 24 000
TOTAL ASSETS 995 125
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Owner’s equity 580 000
Capital 5 580 000
Non-Current Liabilities 410 000
Long term loan: XYZ Bank  410 000
Current Liabilities 5 125
Trade and Payables 8 5 125
TOTAL EQUITY AND LIABILITIES 995 125
•  The Statement of Financial Position shows all Assets, Owner’s Equity and Liabilities of the business.
•  The Statement of Financial Position should always balance:
◊  The reason why the Statement of Financial Position should balance is that there are only two options
for a business to obtain capital:
 »  Own money
 »  Borrowed money
◊  If the business wants to purchase assets, it has to use the own or borrowed capital. This means:
 »  Total Assets = Owner’s Equity + Total Liabilities.
Activity 2
What is the difference between the Statement of Comprehensive Income and the Statement of
Financial Position?
===== PDF PAGE 104 (book page 102) =====
3. Own vs. borrowed capital:
3.1 Own capital:
Own capital is the investment made by the owner of
the business.
•  In a Sole Trader there is only one owner
and he/she will contribute all own capital. If
someone else gives capital to the business,
it will either be in the form of a loan (and
therefore borrowed capital) or if the second
person is a co-owner of the business, it will no
longer be a Sole Trader, but a Partnership.
•  In a Partnership a minimum of two and a
maximum of 20 owners may contribute capital
towards the business. Each partner will receive
or portion of the profits, depending on the %
that was agreed upon between the partners in
the Partnership Agreement.
•  In a Company the business sells shares to
shareholders. Each person who owns shares
in the business is an owner of the business
and he/she will be entitled to a dividend
(profits of the business are divided between
all shareholders in the ratio to the number of
shares owned).
3.2 Borrowed capital:
•  Any money that the business borrows creates
a Liability for the business. It is important to
remember if money is borrowed, that it is not
only the loan amount that has to be repaid, but
also interest.
•  Borrowed capital is also known as foreign
capital, because it does not come from the
owner(s).
•  Capital is usually borrowed from the bank.
Because businesses will borrow on both the
long-term and short-term, we need to keep
in mind that there is an important difference
between long-term and short-term borrowing:
◊  If capital is borrowed and repaid over the
long-term (longer than one year), it is said
that it was borrowed on the capital market.
◊  If it has to be repaid over the short-term
(one year or shorter), it is borrowed on the
money or credit market.
•  Although buying on credit is not a loan, it is still
a source of borrowed capital (a liability) for the
business, as it has to be repaid (sometimes
with interest, but usually the business gets
a couple of months interest-free to repay
the creditor).
Activity 3
Differentiate between own and borrowed capital.
3.3 Factors to consider when deciding
between own vs. borrowed
capital:
Most businesses will use a combination of own and
borrowed, but if the business is not sure which one
should be used in a particular situation, the following
guidelines may be useful:
3.3.1	 The	finance	period	and	the	nature	of
the assets bought:
•  Capital obtained from issuing shares is
permanent, but borrowed capital must be
repaid within a specific period.  If long-term
finance is required, it may be better to choose
own capital.
•  Long-term assets should maybe be financed
using own capital, but if there is insufficient
own capital, it is not a problem to finance long-
term assets with capital borrowed over the
same period.
◊  If an asset has an indefinite lifespan such
as a building, it is acceptable to take out
a mortgage loan over 20 or 25 years and
repay the loan over a very long term.
◊ However, if a machine has an expected
life span of 3 years, the repayment period
of the borrowed capital should not exceed
3 years. If the loan has to be repaid over a
period of longer than 3 years, the original
loan will not yet be repaid and a new loan
will be required to replace the machine.
3.3.2 Urgency:
•  It is a relatively fast process to obtain a loan.
Most banks will give an answer within a day or
maybe a week.
•  To sell shares in a company is a long and
cumbersome process.
3.3.3 Control:
•  If the business issues more shares to new
shareholders, there are more people who can
vote for the directors at the AGM; consequently
the control or management of the company
may change hands. However, if the existing
shareholders buy the new shares in the
same ratio as the existing number of shares
held, there will be no impact on who controls
the company.
===== PDF PAGE 105 (book page 103) =====
•  Banks and creditors do not have a say in the
management of the company.
3.3.4 Solvency:
•  To determine if a business is solvent, we will
look at the Solvency ratio
◊  Solvent = assets > liabilities.
◊  Insolvent/bankrupt = assets < liabilities.
•  When the ratio between assets and liabilities is
low, it is better to sell shares rather than take
out a loan that may bring the solvency of the
business in jeopardy.
Activity 4
Explain FOUR criteria that could be used when the business has to decide if it should use own or borrowed
capital.
◊  A credit card is another form of short-
term credit. The bank issues the person or
business with a credit card that can be used
to buy goods or even draw cash. The bank
will charge the credit card holder interest on
the amount of credit used. Transactions can
either be done on the “straight account”,
which means the repayment period is up to
six months, or on a “budget facility” which
can range from 12 to 60 months. The credit
limit is the maximum amount that can be
spent on the credit card.
◊  Credit allowed by manufacturers and
businesses is known as trade credit or
suppliers’ credit or credit on an open
account. The supplier allows the buyer
an amount of credit, based on the buyer’s
creditworthiness. The account is considered
to be an “open account”, because it stays
open for as long as the buyer keeps buying
and repaying the account.
◊  Instalment sale transactions are usually
associated with the purchase of equipment
or vehicles. A monthly instalment that
includes the repayment of the capital
amount and interest is required. If the
buyer does not pay the account as per
the agreement, the seller has the right to
repossess the item that was sold, because
ownership of the article is only transferred
to the buyer when the account is settled.
◊  If a business leases equipment or a vehicle,
the business pays a monthly instalment for
the use of the item, but ownership is never
transferred to the business.
Activity 5
Differentiate between short-term and long-term capital and explain how the business could go about raising
working capital.
4. Types of capital: Long-term
vs. short-term capital
4.1 Long-term capital
•  Long-term capital is also known as
Fixed Capital.
•  The most common source of long-capital is
selling shares (own capital), while the most
common form of long-term borrowed capital is
a loan from the bank.
4.2 Short-term capital
•  Short-term capital is often referred to as
Working Capital.
•  Because capital obtained by selling shares
is considered Long-term capital, we will
focus here on obtaining credit in the short
term. Possible sources of credit in the short
term include:
◊  An overdraft with the bank can only be
arranged on a current (cheque) account.
An overdraft means the bank allows the
account holder to draw more money out
of the account than the person has in the
account. The overdraft facility can be used
as and when the money is needed and
interest is only charged on the portion of the
overdraft used.
◊  An individual or business can also apply
for a short-term loan from the bank. The
bank will often ask for some form of security
before granting the loan. Interest is charged
on the loan amount.
===== PDF PAGE 106 (book page 104) =====
4.3	 Factors	that	influence	the	demand
for long-term vs. short-term
capital:
•  The nature of the business: Manufacturers
need more fixed (long-term) capital than
retailers to buy fixed assets such as equipment
to establish the manufacturing plant. A
manufacturer will therefore have a bigger
demand for fixed capital than a retailer or
service undertaking of the same size.
•  The size of the business: The bigger the
business, the fixed (long-term) capital it will
need to buy machines and vehicles. The bigger
the business, the more working capital will be
needed for salaries, water and electricity, rent
and other expenses.
•  The stage of development: If the business
is still expanding, it will probably need more
fixed capital to buy additional machines and
equipment. A business that has already been
going for a couple of years, probably already
has the required machine and may only need
to replace it when it becomes outdated or if
it has too much wear and tear. Do you think
new businesses need more working capital
to pay expenses than an already established
business?
•  Time of production: The longer it takes to
manufacture the final product, for example,
to develop a new townhouse complex, the
more working capital will be needed, because
until the production is completed, working
capital is tied up and no income is received. A
product that takes a relatively short period of
time to produce will generate working capital
in a shorter period of time and therefore less
working capital will be needed to tide the
business over.
•  Rate of stock turnover: Stock turnover
measures how fast inventory is sold. The
higher the stock turnover, the less additional
working capital is required, because there is
a constant stream of money coming into the
business.
•  Buying and selling terms: If the business
buys inventory for cash, but sells on credit it
will need more working capital than a business
that sells for cash while buying on credit.
5. Budgeting
5.1 What is a budget?
A budget is a tool that will assist the business
(or person) to plan how much money will be
available (income) and how it should best be spent
(expenditure).
5.2 The purpose of budgeting:
•  Budgeting is a tool used for financial planning,
because it forces the financial manager to think
about the future and what will be needed.
• Budgeting helps with the process of financial
decision-making, because the information is
available when needed.
•  Budgeting is not only an instrument to control
how money is spent, but also the amount
spent which not only helps with the financial
evaluation of different departments, but the
business overall.
5.3 Types of budgets:
5.3.1 A capital budget is used to plan fixed capital
requirements.  It is a long-term financial
planning tool to plan the purchases of fixed
assets such as Land & Buildings, Vehicles
and Equipment.
5.3.2 A cash budget  is used to do short-term
financial planning. It is used to plan for
working capital requirements to cover
payments to creditors, to buy inventory for
cash, to finance debtors and to pay for the
expenses associated with the day-to-day
running of the business.
Activity 6
Explain how a budget could be viewed as a tool that is used for financial planning AND financial control.
6. The difference between
cash	and	profit:
• It is crucial that the entrepreneur understands
the difference between cash and profit. A
business can make a healthy profit, but still
develop cash flow problems …
◊  Profit is the difference between income and
expenses, but not all profit is in the form
of cash.
◊  If the business sells to a debtor, the
business will make a profit, because the
selling price of the inventory is more than
the cost price. The business, however, has
to wait a couple of months until the debtor
pays the account before cash actually
comes into the business.
===== PDF PAGE 107 (book page 105) =====
7. Selling on credit to a
debtor:
7.1 Credit trading
When the business sells on credit, the person buying
on credit is called a debtor i.e. a debtor owes money
to the business from which it bought goods on credit.
7.2 Advantages of / reasons for selling
on credit:
•  A business may sell on credit, because by
doing so it increases its turnover (sales) and
ultimately the profit is increased.
•  Granting credit to customers may give the
business a competitive advantage in the
market, because consumers do not always
have cash to buy everything they need. This
will create goodwill and loyalty amongst
customers and they will continue to buy now
and pay later.
•  If the competitors are also granting credit, the
business will at least not be at a disadvantage
in comparison to its competitors if it also sells
on credit.
•  Credit stimulates the economy, because
more goods are sold and businesses make
more profit. This means more jobs can be
created in the retail industry and even in the
manufacturing industry (providing goods are
not imported).
7.3 Disadvantages of selling on credit:
•  The business runs the risks of bad debts, i.e.
unpaid accounts that have to be written off.
•  Credit trading increases the administrative
expenses, because:
◊  the business has to for example, obtain
credit references to determine the
creditworthiness of the potential debtor and
this means telephone calls and more paper
work which all costs time and money
◊  it has to send statements out to remind
debtors to pay their accounts
◊  this means more work and therefore an
increased salary bill to pay more employees
to do the work.
•  The credit trader needs more working capital,
because the business has to wait to get the
money from the debtor. This may even cause
cash flow problems if the debtors are not
carefully managed.
•  The business incurs opportunity costs.
Opportunity cost refers to the situation where
the business cannot use an opportunity that
may presents itself (e.g. buying stock on a sale
from the supplier), because the business does
not have cash while it waits for debtors to pay.
• From the consumer’s point of view, too much
credit may lead to financial problems if the
person buys more than what they can afford
to repay.
•  If we look at the bigger picture, too much credit
may lead to an increase in demand and thus
demand-pull inflation where an increase in
demand means businesses are increasing the
prices of goods.
Activity 7
You are about to start your own business selling handmade furniture. You will enter into the business venture
with two other people. One is in favour of selling on credit, while the other one feels sales should only be
made when the customer pays cash. Neither of them can substantiate the “gut feel” of their opinions.
Make a list of the advantages and disadvantages of only selling for cash in preparation for a meeting
between the two people.
7.4 The credit policy of the business:
The credit policy will specify the following:
•  Credit standards describe the criteria that
are used when a decision is made whether
to grant credit to a customer or not, i.e. the
creditworthiness of the potential debtor. These
criteria could include:
◊  A credit application form will help the
business to judge the financial status of
the customer by asking questions relating
to place of employment, salary, how long
he/she has worked there, residential
address, whether the person owns or rents
the property, how long he/she has lived
there etc.
◊  The financial position of the customer
is evaluated.
◊  Bank references – the seller will ask his/
her bank to get a status report on the buyer.
The status report will indicate if the buyer is
responsible when it comes to managing his/
her cheque account or if he/she writes out
cheques which are dishonoured.
===== PDF PAGE 108 (book page 106) =====
Additional activities
Indicate if the following statements are true or false. If false, give a reason why it is incorrect:
1. The relationship between own capital and borrowed capital is known as solvency.
2. A business in a good financial position will probably be able to negotiate a better interest rate when
borrowing money.
3. When a bank is asked for a reference for a prospective debtor, the bank will only give the person’s
balance on the account.
4. Short-term funds are borrowed on the credit market.
5. It is important to maintain the liquidity of the business by maintaining a favourable ratio
between fixed and working capital.
6. A good financial policy will stipulate that current assets will be financed with long-term funds.
7. The use of borrowed capital increases the risk in a business.
Choose the most correct alternative when doing question 8 - 12:
8. If the business sells on credit, but replaces all goods on a cash basis, it will … the demand for
working capital.
 A    not influence     B    increase
C    decrease    D    All of the above
9. Which of the following is a source of working capital?
A Sale of shares     B Long-term loans
C A mortgage bond   D Bank overdraft
◊  Credit bureau (e.g. ITC) checks: The credit
bureau collects information on a buyer’s
credit reputation; this information is shared
with the seller at a cost.
◊  References from other businesses of the
customer’s previous credit transactions
are obtained. The businesses are phoned
to inquire about the payment record of the
potential debtor. All such references are
highly confidential.
•  The credit period refers to how long debtors
have to settle their accounts. The longer the
credit period granted, the more attractive it will
be for customers, but the more working capital
the business will need.
•  The credit limit describes the maximum credit
that a specific debtor will be allowed. The
person’s credit limit is determined by his/her
creditworthiness.
•  Cash discount is sometimes given to
encourage the debtor to settle the account
early. If you see something like the following
on a credit statement, “3/60 net 120”, it means
a 3% discount will be given if the account is
settled within 60 days, but the maximum time
the debtor gets to pay the account is 120 days.
7.5 Credit control:
Credit control is very important in any business that
sells on credit to debtors because:
•  Increased sales mean higher profits, but also
higher risks of bad debt.
•  Credit sales help to build up customer loyalty
(patronage), but once again it serves no
purpose that the business has loyal customers
that turn into bad debt.
•  Credit control and credit collection should not
be too rigid. If the debtor is in financial difficulty,
the law allows for a debtor to get credit
counselling and the opportunity to negotiate
new payment terms. This is obviously only the
case if the debtor has a valid problem. It allows
the debtor the opportunity to repay debt without
getting into worse financial problems and
allows the business to reduce the bad debts of
the business due to non-payment.
===== PDF PAGE 109 (book page 107) =====
10. Credit control helps to …
A create good will with debtors  B reduce admin expenses
C improve the cash flow of the business D All of the above
11. The collection of overdue accounts is the responsibility of the …
A selling department   B financial department
C general manager    D creditors clerk
12. Which one is NOT a source of information about the financial status of a prospective debtor?
A Bank reference     B Family reference
C Credit bureau reference   D Business reference
13. An Income Statement is also known as a …
14. A Balance sheet is also known as a …
15. Discuss THREE factors that will determine how much working capital a business will need.
16. Explain the concept Triple Bottom Line reporting and its relevance to the financial manager.
