Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 9: Production / Operations Management

===== PDF PAGE 87 (book page 85) =====
PRODUCTION / OPERATIONS
MANAGEMENT
1. Introduction
• Production management refers to the
management of processes that create value
in order to satisfy the needs and/or wants of
consumers. This process of “creating value” is
when goods are produced.
•  Production has traditionally been associated
with goods being produced in factories.
•  The concept of “production” has, however,
expanded over the last few decades to include
as well “operations” that are performed to
create a service that will satisfy customers’
needs. For example, banks and insurance
companies offer services to customers. This
is why the Production function is sometimes
called “Operations management”.
•  When goods are produced it is possible
to trace a tangible production process,
but a service is something intangible that
is produced.
•  The production function, like all other functional
areas in the business, does not operate in a
vacuum. The production function forms part of
the internal supply chain of the business. Look
at the illustration below to understand where
the production function fits into this internal
supply chain.
Purchasing Function:
Procurement of the
resources that are needed
by the production function
(and all other departments).
Production Function:
Uses the input (resources)
bought by the Purchasing
function to transform
these resources into
goods / services based
on the needs / wants of
the market.
Marketing Function:
Goods / services produced
by the Production function
are marketed to the
relevant target market.
2. Factors of Production
• Although there has traditionally only been four factors of production, we have added Information
technology as a fifth production factor.
Labour (Human Capital)
Capital
Entrepreneurship
Factors of Production
Information Technology
Land / Raw Materials
 Skills, knowledge and experience.
Includes all capital i.e. money and fixed assets that are
used when goods / services are produced.
 Opportunities identified to combine the resources
of land, capital, information technology and labour to
produce goods / services.
Information technology refers to the use of technology
to satisfy customer needs. This could be the use of new
machines, online shops, online banking, etc.
All the natural resources that are used in the production
of goods / services.

===== PDF PAGE 88 (book page 86) =====
•  These factors of production are used (in
various combinations) in the Production system
of a business.
•  A business will look out for factors of
production that are valuable and that could
give the business a competitive advantage
in the market. The following criteria describe
when a resource is considered to be valuable:
◊  It is difficult to imitate
◊  It is durable
◊  It is scarce.
Activity 1
Draw up a list of all factors of production your school uses to ensure that a high quality service is being
offered. Motivate how each element contributes to the smooth running of your school.
3. Tasks of the Production
Function
•  It is the responsibility of the Production
manager to ensure that all systems /
procedures that are part of the supply chain
are well planned, organised, converted into
action and controlled.
◊  Input: The business will need to ensure
that the correct, raw materials, know-how,
capital, information and quality control
mechanisms etc. are in place before the
business starts to produce goods/services
that will satisfy customers’ needs / wants.
 »  Clear and proper communication
between the Operations manager,
Purchasing manager, Human Capital
and Financial manager is crucial at
this stage.
◊  Transformation: The manager needs to
ensure that the correct, facilities, labour and
capital are in place to transform inputs into
goods / services.
◊  Output: It is important that the output
(goods / services) being produced
meets the predetermined standards and
quality criteria.
◊  Acceptance: Goods / services that meet
the necessary quality standards are finally
sold to or accepted by the customers
through marketing activities.
 »  Communication with the Marketing
manager is important.
Input Transformation Output Acceptance
•  While the Production manager is conducting the above activities, he/she will be involved with three
specific tasks to ensure that the production process runs smoothly.
Long-term tasks
Specific Tasks
Medium-term
tasksShort-term tasks
===== PDF PAGE 89 (book page 87) =====
Long-term tasks •  These decisions are considered to be long-term, because research, consultation
and discussions take place before these decisions are made.
•  A second reason why these are long-term decisions is because once they are
implemented, it is not something that can be changed quickly.
•  These decisions take place before the production process (actual input,
transformation and output) takes place.
•  Examples of these types of decisions are: choosing the factory premises,
decisions about the factory layout, deciding on a production system, the selection
and design of the product (product specification), as well as obtaining the
required equipment.
Medium-term
tasks
•  These decisions are made over a medium-term and could be adapted quarterly or
even monthly if need be.
•  Examples of such decisions are: determining the production budget and
production quantities, safety measures, materials management and machine
maintenance.
Short-term
tasks
•  These are decisions that are made on a day-to-day basis regarding the input,
transformation and output of goods and services.
•  For example: These tasks may include the daily work-plan that is drafted
to ensure that the correct quantity of goods is produced as well as the
implementation of quality control.
Activity 2
Identify a business that you are familiar with. Briefly discuss the Long, Medium and Short-term decisions
that the business had/has to make to ensure a well-functioning production system.
3.1 Long-term decisions / tasks:
3.1.1 Choosing the factory premises (location)
•  The factory location is a critical element that could affect the profitability and the possible expansion of
a business.
•  The following factors may impact on the decision regarding the location of the factory:
Availability of services
Integration with business
 “partners”
Availability of labour and skills
Location Elements
Proximity to the resource vs.
market
Site costs
Room for expansion
Special grants
Location Elements (continued...)
Regional regulations
Availability of transport
===== PDF PAGE 90 (book page 88) =====
Proximity to the resources vs. proximity to
the market:
The business may choose to locate either close to
the resource or close to the market. The decision will
be influenced by the type of product produced.
•  If it is a product made from a resource that
is perishable, such as tomato soup, it will be
better to be close to the tomato farm in order
to get the product to the factory as fast as
possible before it spoils. Once the tomato soup
is made and in the tin, it is much easier to
transport the tins of soup.
•  If the product is something like furniture made
from wood, it is better to be close to the
market. Logic dictates that it is much easier to
transport wooden logs over large distances,
than transporting furniture which may be
difficult to handle or be damaged in the process
of getting it to the market.
Integration with business
•  The business could decide to locate close to
other factories or business units that all work
towards satisfying the same consumer need.
•  For example: You will find a large number of
car manufacturers in the Eastern Cape. It will,
therefore, make sense if the manufacturers of
tyres, car radios, car seats, etc. are located in
the same area.
•  Being close to each other allows for easy
transportation and access to components to
assemble the final product.
Availability of labour and skills
•  The business has to attract labour with the
correct skills, and therefore, it may be a
good idea to locate the factory in an area
where there is already a concentration of the
required skills.
•  Unfortunately this is not always possible.
Sometimes the business has to attract the
labourers required to the desired location.
Think of a mine for example; it has to locate
in the area where the mineral resource is and
then attract skilled labour to that location.
Availability of services:
The business will be concerned with locating
itself close to services such infrastructure (water,
electricity, communication networks and waste
disposal).
Availability of transport
The business first has to consider the type of transport
system required to convey resources and/or the final
product before locating close to the appropriate
transport network (existing roads, airports, railway
systems, harbours and/or a pipeline).
Room for expansion:
The business should consider the possibility to
expand in the future and choose a location that will
accommodate this expansion.
Special grants:
The government sometimes offers special grants
(low rental or low rates and taxes) as a way to attract
industries to certain locations in order to stimulate
economic growth in those areas. A business would
only consider such a location if the other elements
discussed are also available in those areas.
Site Costs:
The business will have to consider the cost
implications (cost to level the ground, of laying
pipelines, rates and taxes, etc.) of setting up in a
particular area.
Regional regulations:
It is important that the business checks that the
location has no previous violations (such as
environmental dangers) or that the location has no
historical land claims.
Activity 3
Identify a factory in your local community and use the above elements to assess if the factory is located in
an ideal location.
3.1.2 Factory layout
•  Once the business has decided on the location
of the manufacturing plant, it is important that
the business considers the factory layout in
order to maximize production.
•  The factory layout refers to the physical
arrangement of the equipment that is used as
part of the production process.
•  The objective of an effective factory layout is to
ensure a smooth flow of the necessary work,
materials, labour and information during the
production process.
•  Effective factory layout will promote:
◊  Productivity
◊ Safety
◊  Quality of goods / services
===== PDF PAGE 91 (book page 89) =====
• The following are criteria that could be used by the Production manager to help assemble an effective
production line / system:
Criteria for
Factory Layout
Best use of space
VisibilityDistance
Limit discomfortCoordination
SafetyFlexibility
Handling
Flexibility A good layout is one that can easily be modified if need be. However, the bigger the
machines, the more difficult it becomes to move them around.
Coordination The layout should be set up in such a way that it allows for an easy flow, i.e. input
leading to output during the production process. Think about the process of making
crisps. The potatoes are received and then washed. So the washing machine should be
close to the delivery area. Then the peeling process follows, so this machine should be
next to the washing machine. The potatoes are now cut, so the cutter follows after the
peeler, etc. …
Distance This distance that labour and materials have to travel between the various production
stations should be minimised to avoid accidents and/or wastage.
Handling The handling of the raw material and final goods should be reduced to a minimum, to
avoid damaging the raw material and/or product (lesser quality).
Best use of
space
It is important to consider the optimum utilisation of space by looking for opportunities to
stack goods (i.e. make use of vertical space available).
Visibility All equipment and materials should be clearly visible to avoid accidents or goods that
are misplaced.
Limit discomfort The business should avoid situations of poor lighting, excessive heat, noise, smells, etc.
Safety This should always be one of the top priorities of the production department. The
business must ensure that, as far as possible, all risks are noted and the necessary
precautionary measures are in place.
Advantages of proper factory layout:
•  From the employee’s point of view:
◊  If there is a logical flow of production
activities, it will result in less physical
movement by the workers, which means
they will be less tired and more productive.
◊  Higher productivity has the potential benefit
of higher wages.
◊  Optimum utilisation of space and a logical
flow may lead to fewer accidents.
•  From the business’s point of view:
◊  If the production process runs smoothly,
more goods will be produced and this may
lead to a higher turnover (more sales).
◊  If less material is wasted it will translate into
lower production cost and higher profits.
◊  If workers are more productive it will mean
better profits for the company.
◊  It is easier to implement a system of
production control if activities follow a
logical flow.
◊  The general safety in the factory is
promoted.
===== PDF PAGE 92 (book page 90) =====
Production Systems
Combination
 ProductionBatch Production Jobbing ProductionMass Production
Mass Production
•  Mass production occurs when standardized
products are produced in large quantities.
•  Because the products are standardized (the
same design and material used), there is a
limited variety of goods, i.e. the process of
duplicating the same product at the same
quality level is continuous.
•  This allows for the business to produce large
quantities of the same product in a relatively
short period of time.
•  There has to be a stable demand for the
product before a manufacturer can start to
produce in large quantities.
•  Machine capacities have to be kept in sync.
For example: If one part of the production
process takes twice as long as another part
of the process, the business has to use two
machines to avoid bottlenecks.
•  This type of production system is highly reliant
on high quality single purpose machines. single
purpose machines can only be used for one
purpose and therefor the variety of products
that can be manufactured using that machine
is very limited. These single purpose machines
are expensive and a large capital investment
is required.
•  Mass production relies heavily on automation,
because assembly lines with conveyor belts
make mass production easier.
•  Mass production usually results in a lower
cost per unit, because standardized products
means work is done faster and more cheaply,
because workers and machines are used to
their maximum potential.
•  Generation of large volumes of goods could be
problematic if good quality control is lacking. If
detection of problems takes too long during in
the production run, all products manufactured
will have the same flaw; this could prove costly
to the business.
•  A system of mass production could be
inflexible, because it is difficult to cope with
changes in demand and if a machine breaks,
expensive delays could occur and this may
cause bottlenecks in the production process.
Jobbing Production
•  An example of a goods being produced using
this system is an individualized wedding dress
or the production of capital goods, such as
building a house.
•  Jobbing refers to a system where one job is
finished before a new one is started.
•  The products that are produced are usually
complicated by nature and done according to
the customer’s specifications. It is seldom that
the production of the same product is repeated
which means these products are usually
produced one at a time.
•  This system allows for more flexibility and can
be adapted to customers’ needs regarding the
type and volume of production.
•  Jobbing requires employees to have multiple
skills as they will be producing individualised
goods for customers, i.e. the production
process / task is not routine by nature.
•  Jobbing requires general purpose machines,
i.e. machines that can be used for more than
one task. These multi-purpose machines
are usually cheaper than the single-purpose
machines used for mass production.
•  Stockpiling cost is higher because a variety of
spare parts and raw material must be kept.
3.1.3 Deciding on a production system
•  Production systems describe the process of …
Input Processed Output
•  There are two basic types of production systems, namely continuous production and
interrupted production.
◊  Mass production is an example of a continuous production system
◊  Batch production and jobbing are examples of interrupted production systems.
===== PDF PAGE 93 (book page 91) =====
Batch Production
•  Batch production refers to a production
system that falls between mass production
and jobbing.
•  Large quantities of similar products are made
in batches, for example, producing a dozen
or a hundred of the same product (products
are made in batches and one batch has to be
completed before a next batch is started).
•  This system allows for more flexibility
regarding the colour, size and patterns of the
items produced.
•  It is easier to overcome delays in production
than during mass production, because if a
machine breaks, the production of a different
component can be continued.
•  The production cost per unit, however, is
higher than with mass production.
•  An example of batch production is the 1.4
white VW Polo. Thereafter red cars can be
manufactured or the production system can be
adapted to manufacture 1.6 Polos.
Combination Production
•  Many manufacturing businesses have seen a
shift towards a system where mass production
and jobbing and/or batch production are used
in combination with one another.
•  Technology is allowing for a more customized
(according to customer specifications)
approach than traditional mass production.
•  This combination production system has added
value to the supply chain of a business and
could result in a competitive advantage for
the business.
•  An example of a combination production
system is when a customer chooses the
interior colour and other add-ons for his/
her car. The body of the vehicle is still mass
produced, the colours are still done in batches,
but the interior is personalised.
Activity 4
Identify four products – one item for each of the production systems and discuss how the production system
is used to make the different products.
3.1.4 The selection and design of the product
(product specification)
During the process of product specification the
methods, used in the production process and the
materials that will be used, are standardised. This
means that quality standards are set.
The importance of product specifications:
•  The suppliers of the materials will know exactly
what type and quality of material are required.
•  It is easier to manage the control during the
delivery of the raw materials (has to meet
predetermined standards), as well as during
the manufacturing process.
•  Employees know the expectations and aim
to perform accordingly. This may lead to less
wastage, better productivity and ultimately
more profits for the business.
•  The customer knows what level of product
quality can be expected.
3.1.5 Obtaining the required equipment.
The decision about which machine to buy, will be
influenced by a variety of factors:
•  Production system and rate of production
(mass production, batch production or jobbing)
◊  Specialized machines are designed and
built according to specific requirements of
the business; what it produces is used with
mass production.  These machines are
usually expensive and it is often (due to the
specialised nature of the machine) difficult
to get spare parts. The machines generally
do not have a good re-sale value.
◊  Jobbing usually requires standardized and/
or general-purpose machines. General-
purpose machines can often be bought
at a hardware store and they are usually
cheaper than single-purpose machines.
The maintenance of these machines is
generally not a problem and it is easy to get
spare parts. Examples of a general-purpose
machine would be an electric saw or drill or
a sewing machines to make clothes.
◊  Most businesses use a combination of
standardised and specialized machines.
•  The purchase price of the machine and the
potential maintenance cost of the machine
are important factors to consider by the
Productions manager and Financial manager.
•  The availability (or non-availability) of spare
parts will determine the productivity of
the machine.
•  The longer the lifespan of machine, the better
value for money.
•  The resale value of the machine is important.
The more specialised a machine, the smaller
the market of people who may want to buy
===== PDF PAGE 94 (book page 92) =====
the machine and this may mean a lower
resale value.
•  The amount of training that employees may
need before they can operate the machine and
their safety are also important considerations.
Automation refers to the process where production
activities that were previously performed by manual
labour, are moved into a production line and these
activities are now performed by machines.
•  Automation requires a high capital investment
in machines, but using machines usually
translates into a faster production time.
•  Although it may be a generalisation, machines
usually make fewer mistakes and deliver a
better quality products than people.
•  In terms of labour, the following needs to be
kept in mind when we consider automation:
◊  Workers may lose their jobs
◊  The remaining workers will have to be
retrained to operate the machines, i.e. they
learn new skills, but it will cost the business
money to retrain workers
◊  Operating some of these machines may
become monotonous for the worker and this
may lead to less job satisfaction.
3.2 Medium-term decisions / tasks:
3.2.1 Determining the production budget
The cost of the building, the factory layout, the cost
of the raw material and the wages of the people
working in the manufacturing plant are some of the
components that will affect the price of the product.
The cost accountant has to give an accurate
estimation of the production costs to enable the
business to determine a competitive selling price. The
cost accountant will work closely with the financial
department, the production / operation manager and
the purchasing function to determine and minimise
costs (where possible) without sacrificing quality.
3.2.2 Determining production quantities
Some businesses may consider large-scale
production, while others may prefer small-scale
production. Even though we instinctively want
to produce and sell as much as possible, there is
nothing wrong with small-scale production. The
production quantities will be determined by a number
of factors:
•  If a large, capital investment is needed to
obtain the required equipment, production
on a large scale may be better to ensure the
optimum return on the investment.
•  If the final product allows for a high level of
standardization, for example, manufacturing
pens or computers or toffees or Coca Cola
or … large-scale production will be most
beneficial.
•  If it is a service with a local demand, namely
a nail technician in a local shopping mall,
production on a large scale is not always
possible. But it can be done. Think of Dream
Nails or Perfect 10 that is nationwide.
•  The nature of the product: If it is an exclusive
product (one of a kind wedding dress),
production on a small scale may be a
better option.
3.2.3 Materials management (stock control)
•  Stock control refers to the management of the
inventories that are needed to manufacture the
product (and/or service).
• Material management ensures the right stock
is available at the right time and place and
in the right quantities so that the production
process can run smoothly and no bottle neck is
created during the production process because
the business ran short of certain items.
•  The productions manager has to monitor the
supply chain within the business and order
the necessary inventory (via the Purchasing
manager) before it is needed.
•  Proper materials management means the
Production department has to determine the
optimum stock levels:
◊  The minimum stock level is the lowest
level of stock that can be tolerated before
production or service levels are negatively
affected. When the minimum stock level is
reached, a new order must be placed. The
buffer stock will protect the business from
running out of stock while the business
waits for the new order to be delivered.
◊  The maximum stock level should not be
exceeded, because this will result in stock
becoming obsolete and consequently, the
business may suffer a loss.
• One of the most commonly used stock control
systems is EPOSSE (Electronic Point of Sale
Scanning Equipment).
◊  This is the system that big retailers like Pick
n Pay and Checkers and Edgars etc. use.
◊  The items are scanned at the till and the
computer automatically deducts the stock
item from the inventory.
◊  When a certain (predetermined) stock
level is reached, the computer will alert
the Purchasing department that an order
needs to be placed. It is thus possible for
the business to determine the amount and
value of stock on hand without having to do
a physical stock count.
◊  The system also helps to identify theft,
damage and obsolete stock.
===== PDF PAGE 95 (book page 93) =====
3.2.4 Safety measures
•  Safety refers to any risk that is associated with the health and safety of employees.
•  Safety is always a real concern for business – especially in a manufacturing plant where there are
dangerous machines.
•  To prevent any unsafe conditions in the workplace, the business should put the necessary safety policies
and procedures in place by training employees and implementing procedures to ensure workers adhere
to the safety guidelines.
•  If workers know what to do, how to do it and why these safety measures are important, this will prevent
injuries, but also create a safer and more productive working environment.
Training Programme
Skills
Training
Employee Orientation
Refresher Training
Safety Awareness Training
Audit and Accident
Investigation Techniques
Promotional Activities
Display Accident Statistics
Display Factory
Safety Policy
Display Safety signs
Provide Safety
Handbooks
Practice Emergency Drills
Safety Campaigns
Promote Safety
Improvement Teams
===== PDF PAGE 96 (book page 94) =====
In South Africa safety in the work place is legislated
through the Occupational Health and Safety Act
(OHS-Act):
•  The OHS Act lays out guidelines for a business
with regards to creating a healthy and safe
working environment for all its employees by
stipulating the minimum standards that should
be adhered to.
•  These requirements could be different in
different industries (types of businesses).
•  In order to meet these requirements, the
business has to ensure that the working
environment is reasonably free from hazardous
substances and equipment, which could cause
injuries and/or diseases.
• Before any protective equipment is used by
employees, the employer should first try to
eliminate or reduce the possible danger.
◊  The employer has to be cautious and put
the necessary action plans in place to
prevent / reduce the production, processing,
handling or transporting of harmful
substances and articles.
◊  However, where it is not possible to prevent
dangerous situations, the employer has
to inform employees about the risks and
present plans on how the business aims
to prevent risks (e.g. non-slip surface
on floors) and to ensure safety as far
as possible.
◊  An example of managing  and reducing
risks is the business providing the
necessary safety equipment, such as
helmets, goggles, gloves and boots.
•  This Act specifies that health and safety
risks and preventative measures should be
communicated to employees.
◊  The business needs to conduct the
necessary training and workshops to
communicate and educate its employees on
health and safety.
◊  It is important that employees understand
the risks and that they are able to work
within the guidelines of the safety measures
implemented by the business.
•  However, health and safety is not the sole
responsibility of the employer; the employer
and employees share in the responsibility of
being proactive to identify risk situations and to
implement the necessary control mechanisms
to avoid these risk situations. This means
that there should be cooperation between
employers and employees over health and
safety issues in the business.
•  According to the Act, the employer is
responsible to establish a health and
safety committee:
◊  This committee should consist of
management and employees who
will monitor health and safety within
the business.
◊  This committee should make the necessary
recommendations to management
regarding health and safety issues and the
implementation of policies and procedures
at all levels in the business.
◊  Members of the committee should conduct
both planned and unplanned inspections
in various areas to make sure that risk
systems are in place and working well, but
also to monitor day-to-day operations to
identify potential risks that had not been
identified before.
•  The OHS Act allows external safety inspectors
to enter any workplace or premises where
machines and hazardous substances are used
as part of a production process.
◊  The inspector will conduct an audit of the
minimum safety requirements as stipulated
in the Act.
◊  If the business contravenes any of these
requirements the business is issued a
contravention notice and given 60 days to
make the necessary corrections.
◊  The business could also be issued an
improvement notice, where the business
is required to bring about improvements
to its health and safety policies and
procedures.
◊  The inspector may also request health and
safety documentation; policies, procedures
and documentation regarding internal health
and safety audits.
Practical safety measures in a manufacturing plant:
If conditions in the factory are not closely monitored
and safety measures implemented, it will jeopardize
the health and safety of employees and this could
have a negative impact on productivity (loss of
productivity means lower profits).
• Provide the correct clothes, e.g. helmets,
boots, welding goggles, gloves, etc.
•  Employees should be trained in first aid.
•  The following are basic rules relating to fire
fighting issues:
◊  Employees should be trained in fire
prevention measures.
◊  Fire marshals and fire fighting equipment
should be available.
◊  Fire escapes may not be blocked.
◊  Flammable material, e.g. fuel
must be stored underground and
warnings displayed.
◊  Firewalls must be built.
•  A non-slip floor or rubber boots will help
prevent employees from falling and injuring
themselves.
===== PDF PAGE 97 (book page 95) =====
•  Ventilation is important to get rid of dangerous
fumes. A good ventilation system can either be
achieved by natural ventilation through doors
and windows or an extractor fan.
•  The temperature and humidity in the factory
must be carefully controlled.  If necessary,
the business should install heaters or an
air conditioner.
•  Sufficient light is important to prevent strain
on the eyes of employees and to reduce
accidents.
3.2.5 Maintenance
•  Machine utilization refers to the number of
hours per day that the machine is used. The
business invests large amounts of capital
in machines and equipment; therefore,
machines should be used to their full capacity.
If a machine breaks, it means there is a
loss in production time and idle time means
money is wasted, as labourers still have to
be paid. Maintenance prevents unnecessary
breakdowns which may result in a slower
(and less economical) production process.
•  Other benefits of regular maintenance are:
Improved Safety
Reliability of Production
Lower Operation Costs
Increased Lifespan of Equipment Benefits of
Maintenance
Types of maintenance that could be carried out:
•  Corrective maintenance or remedial
maintenance takes place when the machine
has already broken down and is then repaired.
The problem with this type of maintenance
is that the machine is already out of order,
resulting in an interruption in the production
process while the machine is repaired.
•  Preventive maintenance is done to forestall
machine breakdowns thus averting lost
production time. As soon as a problem arises,
the machine should be serviced.
•  Conditional maintenance is routine by
nature as the machines are serviced at
regular intervals. Refers to inspections and
maintenance of machines at regular intervals,
for example, three-weekly intervals. Because
these routine checks are scheduled, the
production manager can effectively monitor the
production process to ensure the business is
able to meet the required production levels.
3.3 Short-term decisions / tasks:
3.3.1 The work plan
The production manager has to determine the most
effective sequence that will be followed as the product
passes through the production process. Allocating
the correct worker to the correct workstation will
improve productivity. The synchronization of all
components of the production process is important
to avoid bottlenecks.
Control and follow up are very important, because
the manager has to determine whether plans
are executed correctly, and if not, to implement
corrective measures. One element of control is to
perform quality control checks.
3.3.2 The implementation of quality control
•  Quality control is important because in
order to satisfy the needs of consumers, the
business has to supply a product that meets
the expected / required quality standards.
The particular target market may sometimes
===== PDF PAGE 98 (book page 96) =====
even be satisfied with a lesser quality product,
provided it is cheaper.
•  The quality of the product / service will be
determined by the quality of the raw material,
the quality of labour, the machines and working
conditions and how the different production
elements are combined.
•  In order to have successful quality control, the
business has to formulate a set of criteria to
which the product / service should adhere. When
the actual quality of the product / service is
measured against the predetermined standards,
the performance gap is identified.
•  The business has to monitor quality at different
stages during the manufacturing process to make
the necessary corrections before goods / services
move through the entire production process,
without quality defects being identified.
•  The business could assess quality at the
following stages:
◊  Inspecting all inputs to ensure they meet
set standards.
◊  Inspections during the production process.
◊  Inspecting all outputs before they are
distributed to customers.
Reasons to perform quality control:
•  Quality control will help to encourage workers to
deliver good quality products.
•  Quality control can serve as a basis for
remuneration decisions – good quality products
will be rewarded.
•  Retailers know they will receive a good quality
product to sell in their shops (higher turnover
for them).
•  Continuous quality control will help to eliminate
problems in the production process and
thereby reduce production cost by eliminating
poor products.
How to do quality control:
•  A few products from a batch are tested by taking
a sample. If the sample is of an acceptable
quality, it is assumed that all products in the batch
will be of equal quality and the entire batch will
be approved. If the sample is not big enough
to generalise, the business runs the risk of
accepting a bad batch or rejecting a good batch.
•  An inspection is performed if each individual
product is tested and compared with quality
standards. This is time-consuming and
increases the cost of quality control and
is mostly performed when the value of
the product is high. For example: If a new
townhouse complex is built, the project
manager has to make sure that every geyser
works before the keys are given to the new
owners. A new owner will not be impressed
if the geyser does not work and the project
manager says: “But I tested three houses and
they all had hot water”.
•  An outside organisation like the SABS (South
African Bureau of Standards) could assist with
quality control.
•  Objectives / Aims of the SABS:
◊  The South African Bureau of Standards tries
to promote standardization in commerce
and industry by assisting private businesses
in preparing specifications and codes
of practice.
 »  A specification describes the physical
characteristics of the product, such as
material used and the quality of the
material used.
 »  A code of practice is a set of rules that
describes how to manufacture and use
the product.
◊  SABS provides facilities to test the quality
of raw materials and final products. Tested
products that meet quality standards may
bear the standardization mark. The SABS
controls the use of this mark.
◊  SABS educates businesses on
the importance and advantages of
standardization (e.g. mass production and
easier quality control).
Activity 5
Identify a business that is SABS accredited and give your opinion if you think that the SABS accreditation
has helped to create a competitive advantage for the business.
===== PDF PAGE 99 (book page 97) =====
Additional activities
True or False:
1. The production function is responsible for the overall marketing of products to the consumer,
motivate your response.
2. The OHS Act provides guidelines for sustainable development? Motivate your response
3. Jobbing is suited for a product with a large and constant demand.
4. A manufacturer that produces a batch of bubble bath will use sampling to do quality control.
Choose the most correct alternative when doing question 5 - 11:
5. The disadvantage of mass production is …
A.  Equipment and labour are cheap
B.  Quality control is difficult
C.  The cost per unit is high
D.  High stock levels have to be maintained because production happens fast and on a large scale
6. … maintenance is when machines are serviced at regular intervals
A. Regular     B.  Remedial
C. Preventative    D.  Conditional
7. A system of mass production will lead to…
A.  uneven quantities of the same product being manufactured.
B.  small quantities of the same product being manufactured.
C.  large quantities of the same product being manufactured.
D.  large quantities of a large variety of products being manufactured.
8. Which production system will be used to build a space rocket?
A. mass production   B.  jobbing
C. batch production   D.  single production
9. Which production system is used to manufacture school uniforms?
A. mass production   B.  jobbing
C. batch production   D.  single production
10. Which production system is used to design and create matric dance dresses made to order?
A. mass production   B.  jobbing
C. batch production   D.  single production
11. In order to produce mayonnaise in different sizes … production would be most suitable.
 A . mass     B.  batch
 C. continuous    D.  jobbing
12. Define the following two terms:
•  Corrective maintenance
•  Preventative maintenance
13. How would you define the production function of a business?
14. Why would a business consider materials management to be important?
15. Explain the term automation.
16. Describe two different production systems that could be used in a dairy factory.
17. You have been asked to help Coca-Cola decide on a location for a new bottling plant. Explain the
different factors you would consider when deciding on a new location.
18. Discuss the importance of a good factory layout.
19. Explain THREE factors that may influence quality control.
20. Explain TWO advantages and TWO disadvantages of mass production.
===== PDF PAGE 100 (book page 98) =====
21. How would higher levels of automation affect the employees of a car manufacturer?
22. Give TEN examples of products that are usually mass-produced.
23. List FIVE safety measures that will be applied at the Simba chips manufacturing plant.
24. How could a manual production system vs. an automated system affect the cost and quality of the
following products?
•  A flower arrangement
•  Tinned tuna
25. Name THREE factors that may impact on the decision to buy a certain machine.
