Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 1: Business Environments

===== PDF PAGE 3 (book page 1) =====
1. Introduction
By examining the world in which we live, it quickly
becomes clear that surviving without money is almost
impossible.  Money is required to buy food, clothes,
to acquire an education and even to participate in
most recreational activities. Of course it is possible
to appreciate a beautiful (and free) sunset, or to
swim in the ocean without paying to do so, but almost
everything else in the modern world costs money...
In order to make money, one has to become involved
in the business world:
• by finding a job in an existing business, or
• by creating a new business (being an
entrepreneur)
The aim of the first part of this chapter is to help you
to understand how the different business ventures fit
into the bigger picture of the economy.
2. The Private and Public
sectors
Public Sector
Private Sector
Business World
2.1 Public Sector
• Businesses that operate in the public sector
are owned by the government and have been
established to provide collective goods and
services to the people living in the country.
◊	 Collective goods are also known as the
“infrastructure” of the country and examples
include government hospitals and schools,
municipalities, the police force (and many
others).
l Activities
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENTS
• Businesses in the public sector are funded
by the taxes the government collects from
individuals who work, or from businesses
operating in the private sector.
2.2 Private Sector
• Businesses that operate in the private sector
are established by private entrepreneurs.
• The aim of these businesses is to satisfy
customers’ needs and wants, while generating
a profit.
• The entrepreneur has to provide the capital
to fund his/her business and can obtain the
capital by using his/her own money or by
borrowing capital from a bank or elsewhere.
• Competition between businesses operating
in the private sector means a business has to
offer the consumer the best value for money
in order to be successful. A business creates
a competitive advantage and a loyal customer
base by offering:
◊ good quality products / services
◊ competitive pricing
• The private sector can be divided into two
sectors, namely the:
◊ formal sector and
◊ informal sector
Informal Sector
Private Sector
Formal Sector
2.2.1 Formal Sector
• The formal sector consists of those businesses
that are administered according to the laws of
the country as determined by government. In
short, this means these businesses pay tax
and contribute to the GDP (Gross Domestic
Product) of South Africa.
• Businesses operating in the formal sector
have a fixed location, as in shopping malls or
any other fixed premises (for example, but not
===== PDF PAGE 4 (book page 2) =====
limited to petrol stations, your school or the
café on the corner).
2.2.2 Informal Sector
• Businesses in the informal sector do not
adhere to the legal requirement of paying
tax and are therefore not included in the
calculation of the GDP.
• These businesses are usually not found in
fixed locations, although some of them do
operate from fixed premises, for example, the
garage of the entrepreneur.
• Examples of businesses that are typically
found in the informal sector:
◊ Production: the making of beaded jewellery,
grass/wire baskets or animals carved from
wood, etc.
◊ Hawking: people selling their products or
services at the robots or in car parks, etc.
◊ Services: the cutting and braiding of hair on
the street corner or teachers offering extra
lessons and not declaring this income to
SARS, etc.
• Even though the informal sector is not
included in the GDP, it plays an important role
in the South African economy. It contributes
(indirectly) to the economy in the following
ways:
◊ Entrepreneurs in the informal sector must
buy their raw materials (fruit sold on the
street) or products from somewhere and
often it is from the formal sector (the farmer
or fresh produce market or supermarket)
which then contributes to the GDP of
South Africa.
◊ There is also the potential (although it
does not happen often) that these informal
businesses may grow enough to become
part of the formal sector. For example:
The entrepreneur, who starts off building
a product at his/her home, could become
successful and move into formal business
premises, employing others and making
enough profit, requiring him/her to pay tax.
◊ People working in the informal sector
often do so to earn a living and this helps
to alleviate (some) poverty. The money
earned, by people operating in the informal
sector (entrepreneurs or employees), could
be spent in the formal sector.
3. Economic sectors
The economy can be divided into five sectors, based
on the types of activities that are performed in each:
Primary Sector
Secondary Sector
Tertiary Sector
Quaternary
Sector
Quinary
Sector
Over time one can observe a shift from the emphasis
being placed on activities in the primary and
secondary sector, to the tertiary, quaternary and
quinary sectors. The main reason for such a shift
is the economic development that takes place in a
country.
Primary Sector Activities in the primary sector of the economy are concerned with the extraction
or harvesting of raw materials from the earth such as farming (crops and animal
husbandry), mining, fishing, etc. People employed in this sector often have low
educational levels, as it is a labour-intensive sector, with the emphasis on manual
labour. However, as technology develops, it often replaces the manual labourers
resulting in job losses for the “unskilled”.
Secondary
Sector
In the secondary sector, materials extracted in the primary sector are turned into
manufactured goods. All manufacturing and construction activities in the economy
take place in this sector. Examples of businesses in the secondary sector are car
manufacture, textile production, businesses bottling products and engineering, etc.
Tertiary Sector The tertiary sector is where goods and services are sold. Businesses that operate
in this sector may include retail businesses that sell already manufactured goods,
distribution businesses and entertainment, etc.
===== PDF PAGE 5 (book page 3) =====
Quaternary
Sector
The quaternary sector comprises mainly intellectual activities and knowledge-
based activities aimed at future growth and development. Activities could include
scientific research, education, consulting, information management and financial
planning, etc.
Quinary Sector This sector is often regarded as an extension of the quaternary sector and refers to
decision making at the highest levels of society. These decisions have a big impact
on society and the general economic conditions of a country. Activities in this sector
include decisions taken at government level, top management operations in large
businesses and universities, as well as cultural activities and the media.
4. The concept of a “business”
Although the term businesses  has been referred to
in the sections above, and it is daily, it may be useful
to define what is meant by the term “business”.
• A “business” refers to the specific processes
that add value to an economic society and/or to
the particular country in which it operates.
• Businesses create employment and this helps
the people of the country (society) to improve
their general standard of living.
• The processes or economic activities
performed by businesses are directed towards
providing goods and services in order to
make a profit, but no business can afford to
or should lose sight of the responsibility to
achieve economic, social and environmental
sustainability.
• Business operations refer to activities
performed in the private and public sectors.
• The nature of business operations can
be classified as activities in the primary,
secondary, tertiary, quaternary or quinary
sector of the economy.
4.1 Characteristics of a successful
business
A successful business is one that (inter alia):
• has strong leadership to direct the business to
achieve its goals
• will focus efforts to create a competitive
advantage for the business that is meaningful
enough to the target market to foster loyalty to
the business
• will satisfy the needs and wants of the target
market (a group of customers) by providing the
required goods and/or services
• use resources such as the four factors of
production (raw materials, financial capital,
human capital and entrepreneurship /
intrapreneurship) in a sustainable manner
• is a responsible, accountable and transparent
corporate citizen and as such adds value to all
stakeholders:
◊ distributes meaningful profits to owners /
shareholders
◊ develops employees through skills training
◊ uplifts the community in which it operates
through social responsibility projects
◊ pays taxes to government.
Activity 1
Work with a partner and choose a business with which you are familiar. Use the above-mentioned
characteristics of “a successful business” as criteria to compare the business you have chosen. Present
your findings to the class in a two-minute feedback session.
4.2 Important objectives of a business
4.2.1 Survival
• For a business to survive in a highly
competitive economy such as we have in
South Africa, it needs to be aware of external
threats and/or opportunities and the potential
impact these factors may have on it.
• The ability of the businesses - in particular top
management - to plan for the future (both long
and short-term) is crucial to survive.
◊ A business will formulate a vision to indicate
its long-term dream.
◊ It will translate the company’s vision into a
mission statement which will indicate what
needs to be done currently to achieve the
long-term dream.
◊ Long-term and short-term goals will ensure
the business stays on track and that all
employees in the business buy into and
know what to do to stay competitive in the
market in which it operates.
===== PDF PAGE 6 (book page 4) =====
• All business decisions should be assessed
and reassessed to determine the impact of
each on the survival and functioning of the
business. Feasibility (the idea / opportunity that
is considered “workable” and whether it can be
practically implemented) is important.
• A business can only survive if it operates
according to the required factors of production
and if these (factors) are utilised in a
sustainable manner.
• A stable working environment will create
dynamic environment-based relationships
within teams to encourage creativity and
innovation, while minimising tension and
conflict.
4.2.2	 Profitability	and	Growth
• The entrepreneur starts a business with the
aim of making a profit and the long-term
objective of any business is financial success.
Financial success is important, because
sound finances help the business to growth
strategically.
• To improve profitability, management has to
manage resource allocation and monitor the
overall direction of the business. Viability (does
the idea / opportunity that is considered have
the potential to generate sustainable profits
and a Return on Investment?) should always
be kept in mind.
• In order for a business to grow, it has to:
◊ generate healthy (and increased) profits
through higher sales volumes and reduced
expenses
◊ increase physical assets as this will allow
for improved manufacturing expertise and
abilities
◊ develop skills and empower employees to
increase productivity.
4.2.3	 Productivity	and	Efficiency
• Productivity refers to the ability of the business
to achieve the maximum output with the
minimum input.
• Efficiency refers to the ability of a business to
satisfy customers’ needs and wants at the right
time, price and place.
• In order to improve both productivity and
efficiency, it is important to ensure constant
planning and allocate resources in the
optimal manner to minimise wastage, thereby
improving profitability.
4.2.4 Creating and maintaining a
Competitive Advantage
• A business works towards achieving an
advantage over its competitors in order to
dominate the specific market and thereby
increasing the businesses’ profitability.
• A competitive advantage can be based on one
or the combination of the following:
◊ Quality
◊ Price
◊ Use of technology
◊ Service levels
◊ Superior use of resources (human
resources, natural resources, financial
resources or intangible resources such as
skills or patents)
◊ The location of the business.
4.2.5 Employee development and
relationships
• Employees are regarded as valuable assets
in a business and as such it is important to
attract, develop and retain key employees in
the business.
• Managers should ensure employees are
confident that the managers have the skills and
the required resources to achieve success.
• Motivated and committed employees will
help the business to increase productivity in
innovative and resourceful ways to build and
maintain a competitive advantage.
• Relationships in the business have the ability
either to be functional (positive impact) or
dysfunctional (negative impact).
◊ Employees should be trained to be tolerant
of differences.
◊ Employees should be encouraged to
communicate in a constructive manner
about their ideas and even differences.
◊ Time management skills are crucial –
especially where the output of one
employee becomes the input of the second
employee. Can you think of an example of
what might happen to the relationship in the
team if the second employee is unable to do
his/her job?
4.2.6 Technological Development
• With the high level of competition in the
business world, businesses are using
technological developments to differentiate
themselves from their competitors.
• The aim of the business is to increase its
ability to reach the consumer in a quick and
user-friendly manner in order to foster loyalty
between the customer and the business.
• Think of how businesses are satisfying
customers’ needs and wants through the
development of on-line shopping and
apps, etc.
4.2.7 Social Responsibility
• Social Responsibility has the ability to build
long-term relationships with society and
===== PDF PAGE 7 (book page 5) =====
requires the business to be a good corporate
citizen.
• Social responsibility is about the business
acting in an accountable and ethical manner
even in activities where profit is not the main
driving force.
• Why is Social Responsibility important in
South Africa?
◊ South Africa is a country with a heritage of
inequalities of the past - especially when
it comes to education. We have large
numbers of people who do not have the
necessary skills to get a job or to create
their own employment and this leads to
problems such as poverty and crime.
Technological development also has a
negative impact on employment, as people
are replaced by machines. One area where
businesses can make a huge and positive
contribution to the South African economy
and the people of the country is to invest
money in the development of employees’
skills, as well as the broader community.
◊ The South African government also appears
not to be successful in fighting problems
such as malnutrition and diseases like HIV/
Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Businesses
could make a positive contribution to
the people of our country, as well as
productivity, and the standard of living in
general by becoming involved in these
issues.
Competitive
Advantage
Survival
Profitability
and	growth
Productivity
and	efficiency
Employee
development
and
relationships
Social
Responsibility
Technological
Development
Long-term
Objectives
Activity 2
1. Discuss how any FIVE of the above-mentioned objectives could help a business remain ahead of its
competitors.
2. Work with the same partner and use the same business as in activity 1. Brainstorm and then
develop a mind map to indicate how the business that you have chosen works towards some of the
above-mentioned objectives. You may need to do some research on the business to help you to
answer this question. Go to the business’s website (look for the Integrated report) or use any other
relevant resource that can help you to answer this question.
===== PDF PAGE 8 (book page 6) =====
5. The Business Environment
Internal
Business
Environments
Micro
External
Market
Macro
Any business has to consider both the internal and
external environments:
• The micro environment is internal and includes
all the factors “inside” the business that could
affect the success or failure of the business.
• The market and macro environments are
external to the business and include all the
factors “outside” the business that could affect
the success or failure of the business.
Elements of the different Business Environments
Macro
Environment
Market
Environment
Micro
Environment
5.1 Micro Environment
The micro environment refers to all those elements which are internal to the business and which could affect
the overall performance of the business.
Business
Functions Resources Business
Policy
Business
Culture Structure
Micro
Environ-
ment
5.1.1 Business Functions
• There are traditionally eight business functions /
departments to consider in a business.
• These functional areas are interrelated, because
they are all dependent on each other to ensure
the overall success of the business.
• The manager / entrepreneur needs to have a
holistic understanding of these functions and
the role that each function plays in achieving the
strategic vision of the business.
===== PDF PAGE 9 (book page 7) =====
Marketing
Purchasing
Production
Admini-
stration
Public
Relations
Financial
Human
Resources
General
Management

5.1.1.1	 General	Management
• The general management function is responsible for developing a strategic plan for business in order to
improve the overall performance and profitability of the business.
Vision Mission Goals	and
objectives Business strategy
• The management tasks include:
◊ Planning entails looking at the future and
deciding proactively how to tackle certain
issues to achieve success. Different
plans must always be considered and
the best one chosen, but it is absolutely
crucial always to have a contingency plan
(a plan B).
◊ Organising means management has to
combine the factors of production in such
a way that the objectives of the business
are met.
◊ Leading employees means plans are
implemented and employees are helped to
understand what they have to do and how
they have to do it to achieve the overall
goals of the business. Simultaneously,
employees are working towards achieving
their personal goals, ideally resulting in a
win-win situation for the employees and the
business. An effective leader will balance a
task orientation (getting the job done), with
employee orientation –  treating people with
dignity and respect.
◊ The Vision is like a road map to the future
that uses the history and current situation
of the business to determine and describe
where the business would like to be in
future.
◊ The Mission is a refinement of the vision
and specifies the reason why the business
exists. It describes who are we, what do we
do and what our values are.
◊ Goals are long-term accomplishments
that the business wants to achieve, while
objectives are the short-term targets which
must be achieved to assist the business in
reaching the long-terms goals. Goals and
objectives help the business to measure
successes achieved.
◊ The business strategy describes the plan
of action that has to be implemented in
order to achieve goals and objectives. It
is a general program that specifies how
resources will be allocated to achieve goals
and objectives.
===== PDF PAGE 10 (book page 8) =====
◊ Control is a crucial element of achieving
success, because actual results that were
achieved are compared with the standards
that were set during planning. Management
receives feedback about performance and
deviations (from goals) and the reasons for
the deviations are determined and rectified.
◊ Communication can be described as
the transfer and receiving of information
between different people. Without proper
communication it is not possible to build
relationships between management and
employees and between employees in
the same team. Communication is crucial
to ensure employees know exactly what
is expected of them, but also to inform
management about problems. Good
communication has the potential to improve
the overall efficiency of the business,
because the correct information will reach
the correct people at the correct time.
◊ It has already been said that management
must ensure all departments / functions
in the business work together to achieve
the overall vision of the business. Through
coordination all departments are informed
about what is expected of them to achieve
synergy between the work schedules of the
various departments.
◊ Decision-making takes place in order
to solve problems. Before a decision is
taken, all possible and relevant facts must
be considered, while at the same time
keeping in mind that no preconceived ideas
or personal prejudice should influence
the decision.
◊ Delegating is done to ensure a more
meaningful distribution of work possible
and to reduce the burden on management.
When the manager delegates, he/
she allocates duties, authority and
responsibilities to subordinates. It is
important to remember that ultimately, the
manager that delegated will always be
responsible to ensure the job is well done.
One of the corner stones of delegation is
the empowerment of employees to ensure
they feel capable of performing the tasks
given to them.
◊ The purpose of disciplining an employee is
to improve future behaviour. For discipline
to be fair, everybody must know what is
regarded as misconduct and what the
consequences of actions will be. Offenders
should also be dealt with consistently or
else it will undermine the entire process of
disciplinary action. In grade 12 the issue
of staff discipline will be dealt with in great
detail, but for now it suffices to say that
offenders must be given a fair hearing
(procedural fairness).
◊ Motivating employees means to encourage
them to perform to the best of their abilities.
Employees will be motivated in different
ways. Some people may be motivated by
monetary rewards, while others may want
to be appreciated or want a promotion or …
or … or …
5.1.1.2 Purchasing
• The purchasing function will ensure that the
business has the necessary resources to attain
its objectives. This means the purchasing
function will buy goods and services that are
needed by all the other departments in the
business.
• Goods and services will be bought from
different suppliers and it is important to
choose the supplier carefully to make sure the
business has a reliable dealer that can deliver
what is needed.
• Ensuring the business has the necessary
resources means that:
◊ the correct quality resources are
◊ bought at the right price
◊ in the correct quantity and
◊ delivered at the correct place
◊ at the required time
◊ from the right supplier
===== PDF PAGE 11 (book page 9) =====
 5.1.1.3 Production
• The Production function combines the factors
of production (natural resources, labour, capital
and entrepreneurial skill) in order to make a
product that will satisfy the needs of the target
market, thereby ensuring that the profit of the
business is maximised.
• It is important to keep INPUT (manufacturing
cost) as low as possible, without sacrificing
quality of the OUTPUT (product/service).
• The business will need to decide on the best
approach to produce the products. In doing
so it may consider mass production, batch
production or jobbing as options. The option
chosen will be determined by the nature of the
product, the size of the target market and the
capabilities of the business.
• The Production function has to ensure that it
is manufacturing products which are creative,
differentiated and that suit the needs of the
customer. This could be achieved by ensuring
the product is:
◊ safe
◊ reliable
◊ durable and
◊ the after sales service is good
Durable
Safe
ReliableAfter Sales
Service
• One of the issues that the Production function
and Marketing function will consider together
is the product life cycle. This ensures that
products are developed / evolved overtime to
meet the needs of the target market, thereby
assuring the business is capable of maintaining
and even gaining future customer loyalty.
5.1.1.4 Marketing
• One of the first tasks that the Marketing
function will perform is to conduct market
research in order to determine what product/
service is in demand, what price consumers
are prepared to pay, where (place) the product
must be sold and what the best method would
be to communicate with the target market.
Right Quality
Resources
Right Place
Right Supplier
Right Quantity
Right Price
Right Time
===== PDF PAGE 12 (book page 10) =====
The target market may comprise many
variables such as age, disposable income
(LSM groupings), hobbies / interests, gender,
occupation and/or marital status.
• The Marketing department will use different
marketing techniques to grow the market share
of the business. This may include advertising,
sales promotion, personal sales, listening
to customers and monitoring feedback from
customers.
• Some of the general tasks, that comprise
the Marketing function, are to decide the
product/service to be sold, to consider the
most effective (eye-catching, practical and
protective) packaging of the product, to decide
on the best distribution channel, and to decide
and implement the correct pricing strategies.
5.1.1.5 Financial function
• In order to start a business, the entrepreneur
needs to decide how and where to obtain
capital. It is important to remember that capital
is not only the money that is used to start a
business, but includes capital goods such as
machines and equipment.
• The financial function has to ensure that the
business has sufficient capital and that it is
employed in the most productive manner.
◊ Fixed capital (long-term) will be used to buy
fixed assets such as land and buildings,
vehicles and equipment.
◊ Working capital (short-term) will be used to
buy trading inventory, to pay creditors and
to pay business expenses such as salaries,
rent, telephone, water and electricity, etc.
• The entrepreneur may decide to use his/her
own capital or if he/she does not have sufficient
financial resources to start the business,
capital may be borrowed from the bank.
◊ If capital is borrowed, the loan has to be
repaid, but in addition, interest on the loan
also has to be paid. This may place a heavy
financial burden on the business and the
financial function has to make sure the loan
instalments and interest are affordable.
• To determine how much capital is needed,
start-up costs (e.g. buying machines and raw
material) and running costs (salaries, rent, etc.)
will be calculated and compared to how long it
will take before the business generates a profit
to determine the time frame the capital will
have to “carry” the business.
• The financial function has to look at the overall
financial state of the business. Budgets are
important tools to plan and monitor the financial
situation and to ensure the business does not
overspend.
5.1.1.6 Administration
The administration function is responsible for
collecting data, for processing the data into
meaningful and accurate information and then
to keep the information in a format that is easy
to understand. Information should also be easily
accessible and available at the time that it is needed
to make a decision.
5.1.1.7 Human Resources / Human Capital
• The HR / HC department is responsible for the
overall manpower of the business, i.e. it has to
determine how many workers and what levels
of skills are required in the business.
• The HC function has to ensure that the
required employees are recruited and trained
to have the correct knowledge, skills and
experience for the business to perform
optimally.
• There are various parts of legislation that have
a direct impact on the HC function. Some of
them include:
◊ Labour Relations Act
◊ Basic Conditions of Employment Act
◊ Broad Based Black Economic
Employment Act
◊ Skills Development Act
• The HC department is also responsible
for creating fair and ethical remuneration
and retention structures and to monitor the
performance of employees.
5.1.1.8 Public Relations
• The public relations function strives to ensure
the image (brand) of the business is strong
and positive.
• They ensure that the business is contributing to
society in an ethical and sustainable manner.
• The PR department also works to improve
the relationship between the business and
the different stakeholders – both internally
and externally.
Additional Business Function / areas of focus:
Many business theorists have argued that there is
a need for a business to expand to ten functional
areas. The two additional functions identified are:
Additional
Business Functions
Risk Management
Management
Information
Systems (MIS)
===== PDF PAGE 13 (book page 11) =====
Risk Management
Risk management is about identifying and
monitoring the risks that the business is exposed to.
It is important to put the necessary risk strategies
in place to minimise difficulties. Risk management
should not really be seen as a separate business
function, as all the business functions should
have risk management strategies in place thereby
minimising risks in each function.
Activity 3
1. Look at the business functions and use examples to discuss the interrelatedness of the eight
business functions.
2. Use the following table to expand on the idea of how and why Risk Management and Information
Management should be incorporated into all business functions:
Business functions Give examples of different
risks that should be
management in this function.
Explain the different elements of
Information management in this
business function and how the
information should be managed.
Purchasing
Production
Human Capital
Finance
Marketing
Public Relations
Administration
General
Management
5.1.2      Resources
Remember …
Business
Functions Resources Business
Policy
Business
Culture Structure
Micro
Environ-
ment
• The internal resources refer to the resources that are needed by business to function correctly. These
resources are known as the four factors of production.
• Each of the above-mentioned functional departments will have to make sure they obtain the necessary
resources to achieve their departmental objectives.
Management Information Systems (MIS)
MIS will make sure that the necessary technology
is available where and when needed, i.e. in all of
the above-mentioned eight business functions. For
example: The Public Relations function will ensure
that there are MIS in place to ensure all stakeholders
have access to information through the website,
email, skype, etc. Once again, this should not be
seen as a separate business function, but rather
something that all the eight business functions
should incorporate in their daily activities.
===== PDF PAGE 14 (book page 12) =====
GRADE 10 | Business Studies12
Human
Resources
Raw	Materials
CapitalEntrepreneur-
ship
Activity 4
Briefl  y assess the need for each of the factors of production of the diff  erent departments of the business.
5.1.3 Business Policy
Remember …
Business
Functions Resources Business
Policy
Business
Culture Structure
Micro
Environ-
ment
• Business policies are formulated whilst keeping
the vision, mission, goals and objectives of the
business in mind.
• The purpose of business policies is to give
direction to the diff  erent functions and create
a framework in which all business functions
operate.
• Business policy originates from top
management and acts as a framework for
middle and lower management to do functional
planning and to help them with day to day
decision making.
• All the diff  erent policies in the business
must be consistent and fi  t with each other,
as policies that contradict each other will create
confusion and chaos.
• When policies are implemented, it is important
to make certain that everybody understands
exactly what the business aims to achieve.
• As circumstances inside or outside the
business change, it may be necessary to
review policies from time to time to confi  rm
they are still relevant.
• Policies are worth nothing if they are just
written on paper and the implementation
thereof is not closely monitored by
management.
5.1.4 Business Culture
Remember …
Business
Functions Resources Business
Policy
Business
Culture Structure
Micro
Environ-
ment
===== PDF PAGE 15 (book page 13) =====
• Business culture refers to the beliefs and
values in the business.
• These values and beliefs are what direct
the behaviour and attitudes of the internal
stakeholders (employees and managers) of
the business.
• A positive business culture leads to team work,
synergy and a general buy-in of decisions
taken by management.
5.1.5 Organisational Structure
Remember …
Business
Functions Resources Business
Policy
Business
Culture Structure
Micro
Environ-
ment
• Structure within a business refers to the way
in which human resources, authority and
responsibility and the distribution of information
have been arranged to ensure all components
work together to form a systematic whole and
to achieve the goals of the business.
• A clear structure will help the internal
stakeholders (employees and managers) to
understand the role each plays within the
business and the way in which information
is communicated to them and to whom they
are reporting.
• There are different forms of organisational
structures and examples of options to
consider include:
◊ A functional organisation structure
◊ Line organisation structure
◊ Line and staff organisation structure
◊ Matrix organisation structure
◊ Project organisation structure
◊ A Divisional structure based on PRODUCT
◊ A Divisional structure based on REGION
Activity 5
1. Use the internet to research what each of the above-mentioned organisational structures will look
like and draw it in your workbook.
2. Use the same business as in Activity 1. Look at the chosen business’s vision, mission and goals.
Discuss whether or not you believe the business is working towards the given vision, mission and
goals. Justify your response carefully.
5.2     Market Environment
• The market environment consists of elements
outside (external to) the business.
• Although the business does not have control
over these elements, it is affected by these
elements in the market environment and
therefore the business has to:
◊ assess the extent these elements could
impact on the business
◊ put the necessary plans in place to deal
with these elements.
===== PDF PAGE 16 (book page 14) =====
• The following elements are found in the market environment:
Market Environment
Strategic Alliances
IntermediariesCompetitors
NGOsConsumers
Industry
RegulatorsSuppliers
5.2.1 Suppliers
• A business is dependent on its suppliers for
materials and/or services to ensure it can
manufacture the product and/or sell to its
target market.
• It is important that materials in the right
quantity, the correct quality and fair price
and at the time and place where it is needed
are procured.
• The business has to develop strong
relationships with suppliers to avoid disruption
in supply.
• It is important to remember that the supplier
has “some power over the business”:
◊ If the supplier demands a higher price for
materials, it will result in the businesses
having to increase their own selling price.
◊ If the supplier does not deliver the materials
on time, the business will not be able to
meets its objectives, which could result in a
loss of sales for the business.
5.2.2 Consumers
• Consumers are the people who buy and/or use
the business’s products / services.
◊ Think about the fact that the buyer is not
always the consumer and in a case like
this, both parties have to be convinced that
it is in their interest to buy the product. For
example, a mother buys the toy, but her
child plays with the toy.
• The business has to follow consumer trends
to make sure that the business is consistently
meeting the demands of its customer base.
When the demands of the target market
change, the business has to adapt the product
or redevelop the product to maintain this
customer base.
• It is important to remember the buying power
that consumers have over the business:
◊ If the consumer feels that the price of
the product is too high, he/she will stop
purchasing the product and this may
force the business to lower its price
(or lose customers).
5.2.3 Competitors
• These are companies that sell the same,
similar or substitute products (or services) to
the same target market as the business.
• It is vital to remember that it is not only the
actions of current competitors that could impact
on the business, but the possibility of new
entrants to the market is also a threat.
• The business has to ensure that it creates
and maintains a competitive advantage in
the market, to maintain or increase its market
share. Remember we have identified some
factors earlier in the chapter that the business
could utilise to gain a competitive advantage:
◊ Quality
◊ Price
◊ Use of technology
◊ Service levels
◊ Superior use of resources (human
resources, natural resources, financial
resources or intangible resources such as
skills or patents)
◊ The location of the business.
5.2.4 Strategic Alliances
This is where two or more businesses decide to
join forces to take advantage of opportunities in the
market. For example:
===== PDF PAGE 17 (book page 15) =====
• Discovery Vitality Card holders can use their
cards at Sterkinekor to gain a discount on
movies.
• ABSA clients can convert their ABSA rewards
to get 15% more points on their Pick n Pay
Smart Shopper cards.
• Are you aware of any other such alliances?
5.2.5 Intermediaries
• Intermediaries are “middlemen” who form a link
between the business and its consumers in the
distribution channel.
• A business would make use of intermediaries
to gain easy access to a market where the
intermediaries already have direct access to
the customers. For example: It is much easier
for a new designer to sell his/her clothes in
an established boutique, than to open his/her
own boutique.
• Intermediaries are also able to assist the
business in tracking trends in customers’ needs
and wants.
5.2.6	 NGOs	(Non-Government	Organisations)
• These are non-profit businesses that focus
on issues such as uplifting or developing
certain groups in society or protecting the
environmental.
• These NGOs demand that businesses act in
an ethical manner and that the business plays
an active role as a corporate citizen when it
comes to social responsibility issues.
• NGOs often actively campaign for
sponsorships from big businesses.
• Examples of such organisations may include
the SPCA, Junior Achievement (entrepreneurial
development and training via sponsors from
corporations), Nelson Mandela Children’s
Fund, Doctors without Borders and the
National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI) to name
but a few.
5.2.7 Industry Regulators
• These groups provide guidelines to businesses
on how to act to ensure that businesses are
operating in an ethical manner. They are the
watchdogs of industry.
• Examples of such groups: SABS (South African
Bureau of Standards), SACOB (South African
Chamber of Business) and Ombudsmen in the
Insurance and Financial Industries.
• Trade unions also form part of the industry
regulators. Their focus is to ensure that no
employee is unethically exploited and to
enforce employee rights.
Activity 6
Study the market environment of the business you have chosen in activity 1. Identify a “real life” example
for each of the elements mentioned in the market environment.
For example; if your chosen business was Pick n Pay, a competitor would be Checkers.
Porter’s model is a popular way of identifying elements on the Market Environment:
Power of consumers Power of suppliers
Power of substitute products Power of complementary products
Power of potential new competitors Power of competitors
Watch the video at https://hbr.org/video/3765767957001/the-explainer-porters-six-forces for a
quick discussion of these forces in the airline industry.
===== PDF PAGE 18 (book page 16) =====
5.3 Macro Environment
• The developments that take place in the macro environment could have either a positive and/or
negative impact on the business.
• A Business has very little (and in most instances none) control over this environment.

PESTLE
Political
Economic
Social
Techno-
logical
Legal
Environ-
ment
The Table below will help you understand the different elements of the PESTLE analysis that can be used to
analyse the macro environment.
Political factors • These are the political developments within a country or in other countries that
have an effect on the business.
• For example: The political situation in Zimbabwe has forced the UN to place
sanctions on the country. These sanctions have not only affected businesses and
the economy of Zimbabwe as a whole, but also businesses in South Africa that
previously might have imported from Zimbabwe. The dire political situation in our
neighbouring country also has implications for businesses in towns close to the
border as a large volume of Zimbabweans flock to South Africa.
Economic
factors
• These are factors such as inflation, exchange rates, interest rates and taxes.
• These economic factors could impact on the selling price of goods and services.
The business needs to keep these factors in mind when buying raw materials,
manufactured goods and when selling the goods to the final consumer.
Social factors • Social factors have an impact on the standard of living, the quality of life and
disposable income levels of communities.
• These are factors such as poverty, crime, HIV/Aids, unemployment, etc.
Technological
factors
• There is a rapid advancement in the pace in which new technology is developed.
This poses both a threat and an opportunity for a business.
◊ A threat could be the fact that technology (in which large sums of money were
invested), becomes outdated.
◊ An opportunity is the ability of a business to create a competitive advantage
using new technology. Technological upgrades also means that production is
becoming faster and more reliable, which could help the business to save on
raw material (less wastage).
Legal factors • Legal factors refer to the laws within a country.
• There are many laws which have an impact on businesses in the corporate world.
The have an impact on the way a business is run.
• Examples of such laws: Labour Relations Act, Consumers Protection Act,
Occupational Health and Safety Act, etc.
===== PDF PAGE 19 (book page 17) =====
Environmental
factors
• These are factors such as pollution, natural disasters, oil spills.
• Environmental factors could have an impact on the ability of the business to obtain
raw materials to produce its goods and on distributing goods to consumers.
6. Environmental Analysis
• As the three business environments (Micro,
Market and Macro) are all essential ingredients
for the success of a business, it is important
that we are able to analyse the impact
(both positive and negative) of the different
environments on business operations.
Market Environment
SWOT analysis
Only Opportunities
and Threats
Macro Environment
SWOT analysis
PESTLE analysis
Only Opportunities
and Threats
P E S T L E elements
Micro Environment
SWOT analysis
Only Strengths and
Weaknesses
Business
Environments
6.1 SWOT Analysis
• SWOT is an acronym for:
◊ Strengths
◊ Weaknesses
◊ Opportunities
◊ Threats.
• Strengths and weaknesses are internal
business factors, i.e. elements inside the
• Below is a diagram that shows which
“tools” could be used to analyse each of the
business environments to help the business
understand the impact of these environments
on its operations.
business and over which the business
has control.
• Opportunities and threats are external business
factors, i.e. elements outside the business over
which the business has no control. These are
elements that could assist/ push the business
to success or they may hinder the success of
the business – depending on how the business
responds to them.
Strengths: Weaknesses:
• These are the internal capabilities of the
business, which could be used to help the
business gain a competitive advantage, over
other competitors in the market place.
• It is about how the business uses these
strengths that will give it a competitive
advantage (or not).
• The factors which could limit the success of
a business if these factors are not dealt with
correctly and in a timely manner.
• They could have a negative impact on the
competitive position of the business.
===== PDF PAGE 20 (book page 18) =====
• Examples of possible strengths: The business’s
ability to get hold of raw materials, its brand
and intellectual property.
• Examples of possible weaknesses include
poor marketing, lack of resources, low-skilled
employees.
Opportunities: Threats:
• These opportunities are seen as favourable
external factors.
• Factors are favourable when the business is
able to use the necessary mix of resources
to capitalize on these factors to increase the
demand for goods and increase customer
loyalty.
• These are unfavourable factors for the
business originating from the market of macro
environments.
• These unfavourable factors are likely to place
the business a risk or they have the potential to
damage the business.
Activity 7
Complete a full SWOT analysis for your chosen business in Activity 1.
Please make certain that you justify why something is a strength, weakness, opportunity and threat to your
chosen business.
6.2 PESTLE Analysis
• The PESTLE analysis helps a business to
understand the impact that each of the factors
in the macro environment could have on the
business.
• It must be remembered that an impact could
both be positive or negative for the business.
• The table below could be used to help you
analyse the macro environment with the use
of the PESTLE analysis.
Element of PESTLE Challenge/Impact on the
business
Strategy to overcome this
impact
Political factors
Economic factors
Social factors
Technological factors
Legal factors
Environmental factors
Activity 8
Complete a PESTLE analysis for the business you have chosen in Activity 1.
===== PDF PAGE 21 (book page 19) =====
7. Characteristics of the
Micro, Market and Macro
Business Environments:
Dynamic
Complex
Multi-faceted
Characteristics of the Business
Environment
7.1 Complex
• The different business environments are
complex, because they are ever-changing due
to the competitive and hostile factors within
each environment.
• Each environment consists of different
stakeholders, with each placing different
demands on the business.
• The business has limited resources and when
different stakeholders demand the same
resources this complicates the allocation of
resources. For example: Different functional
areas within the business will be competing
for the allocation of resources such as money
or skilled staff. Management has to consider
how the allocation of resources should be
made to achieve the overall strategic goals
of the business.
• It must be remembered that no business
operates within a vacuum and the business is
not only affected by trends and crises in the
environments, it in turn could also potentially
affect events in the market and macro
environments.
7.2 Multi-faceted
• As a business competes and grows within
the different environments, management
has to consider the numerous ways in which
decisions will affect the various stakeholder
groups.
◊ What is seen as positive for one group
might not be positive for another. For
example: The business decides to follow
a programme of automation where
manual labour is replaced by machines
and equipment. This will ultimately have
a positive effect on profits as machines
can work 24/7/365 and do not get sick or
need to take leave, which contributes to
satisfied shareholders. The employees, who
consequently lose their jobs, definitely will
not be happy.
• This multi-faceted nature of the environments
creates challenges for the business. For a
business to remain ethical it is important that
all relevant information is taken into account
and that the impact on all stakeholders is
considered, before decisions are made.
7.3 Dynamic
• The business environments (internal and
external) experience constant change – such is
the nature of life!
• This makes it vital that the business adopts
a flexible approach when dealing with
developments / anomalies in the environments.
It is also vital to have a Contingency plan
(plan B) in case the original plan proves
unsuccessful.
• The business has to remember that
competitors are also exposed to the same
dynamic business environment and therefore,
the business has to find creative and innovative
ways to shape strategies to deal with these
factors. Many businesses use Intrapreneurship
to assist the business in being flexible and
adaptable to the ever-changing business
environments.
===== PDF PAGE 22 (book page 20) =====
Additional activities
1. The micro environment of Pick n Pay includes the following element:
A. Competitors B. IT network supplier
C. Exchange rates D. Vision
2. Woolworths has the least control over the … environment.
A. Micro B. Macro
C. Market  D. Competitive environment
3. When the marketing of a new product offered by Checkers spreads by word of mouth, it is regarded
as a … for Checkers.
A. Weakness B. Threat
C. Opportunity D. Strength
4. Briefly explain what is meant by the term “Business Culture”.
5. What is the difference between a vision and mission statement?
6. Explain the term environmental scanning.
7. Complete a SWOT analysis for Nike. Give three strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
8. Why is it important for a business to assess its competitors in the market?
9. Explain how the following elements of PESTLE could affect a business negatively:
a. Political
b. Economic
c. Social
10. Explain how the following elements of PESTLE could affect the business in a positive manner:
a. Legal
b. Technological
c. Environmental
11. What is the difference between the formal and informal sector?
12. Describe how South Africa could benefit from the informal sector.
13. Explain how the characteristics of the business environments could affect the success of a business.
14. Identify four important long-term objectives for a business. In each case explain the importance of
the long-term objective.
15. Mr Price is focused on long-term sustainability, while adding value to the different stakeholders both
in the short and the long-term. It is important that Mr Price is aware of how the different business
environments could affect the level of sustainability it achieves. Assess each business environment
and suggest how the elements of the different environments could affect the sustainability of
Mr Price.
