Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 4: Business Related Information

===== PDF PAGE 42 (book page 40) =====
1. Introduction
• Businesses use information to make
numerous decisions about operational
procedures such as: financial management,
whether to manufacture products or buy
finished goods, what to make / buy or sell,
potential customers for selling products /
services to, and other marketing issues such
as where to advertise etc. In order to make
these decisions and ensure they add value to
the business, the business needs information
about its competitors, customers, legislation,
economic factors and much more! Consider
the following:
◊ The business needs information about
the customers to help them determine
what the customers’ needs and wants
are to ensure it provides for these needs
and wants in the best possible manner.
It is not good enough, however, merely to
know who the current customers are and
what they want. The business operates
in an ever-changing environment and
may need information to forecast / predict
what customers are likely to demand
in future.
◊ A business is in constant competition
with other businesses selling the same
or substitute products. The aim is to gain
customer loyalty. To achieve this, it is
important that the business scans the
environment and collects information not
only about who the competitors are, but
also what competitors are doing to gain
customers’ loyalty and market share.
◊ Once the business is ready to sell a
product or service, it is important the
business shares this information with
the customers. The business will need
useful information about the customer
(where, who and when) to communicate
effectively with current and future
customers.
◊ Add some of your own ideas about
different types of information that
businesses may need to make decisions
and to communicate with relevant
stakeholders.
BUSINESS RELATED INFORMATION
2. Data and Information
There is often great confusion between the terms
data and information.
2.1 Data
• Data can be viewed as “raw information”.
• Data refers to the collection of production
figures, sales numbers and other detail that
does not yet have meaning when decisions
need to be taken. Consider the following
example:
• In your / a school 30% of grade 10 learners
failed a Business Studies test; 50% of the
learners achieved between 35% and 79% and
20% achieved a distinction. This data reveals
insufficient information as it does not tell the
principal in which grades / classes the learners
are, whether they are male or female, when the
test was written and which teachers taught the
different learners.
• Data must be transformed / processed
into information which is useful for making
decisions in the businesses (or as in this
example – the school).
2.2 Information
• Information is data that has been processed.
Information is valuable in the business
if it provides meaningful information to
decision makers.
• Experience allows the manager to develop
knowledge and wisdom to use the
information in a manner which reveals good
decision-making.
• The following diagram will help you understand
where data and information fit into the
businesses’ decision-making:
DATA
INFORMATION
KNOWLEDGE
and WISDOM
===== PDF PAGE 43 (book page 41) =====
• Let us review the example regarding the
Business Studies performance in your /
a school.
◊ It may be useful to look at the grades and
how marks are distributed.
 » Perhaps the overall failure rate of
ALL Business Studies learners in the
previous test was 30%, but in Mrs XYZ’s
grade 10 class the failure rate was
2% while all the other failures were in
Mr FGH’s class because he was sick for
a week before the test was written and
therefore the work was never explained
to his learners.
 » Or, all the failures are distributed equally
between Mrs XYZ’s grade 10 class and
Mr FGH’s class, but all the failures are
boys who were away on a hockey tour
and consequently never did the work.
 » A third alternative is that Mrs XYZ is still
very young and inexperienced which
is why most of the failures were in
her class.
 » Or maybe none of the learners in
Mr FGH’s class failed and all achieved
distinctions because he always tells the
learners what is going to be in the test,
while Mrs XYZ does not give unfair hints
to her class before they write.
 » Or… or… or …?
 » It is clear that the data would not tell
the principal how to solve the problem.
However, when this data is processed
into information, it is possible to identify
the problem enabling the principal to use
his previous knowledge and experience
to come up with an equitable solution
that will be fair to all involved.
Activity 1
The Pick n Pay Smart Shopper Card is a method used by Pick n Pay to gain information about customers
and their buying behaviour. Discuss the type of information that Pick n Pay could gain via Smart Shopper
Cards and how this information could be used to improve the performance of the business.
Activity 2
Divide into groups and discuss how information obtained through a feedback mechanism like “Hello Peter”
could be used to help ABSA with the following activities:
A. Planning
B. Controlling
C. Decision-making
If you do not know what “Hello Peter” is, use your smart phone to Google it and see what you can learn
about ABSA on this website.
3. Primary and Secondary
Research
Businesses often have to conduct market research
to answer questions about customers’ needs and
wants and their buying behaviour. But we have
already pointed out that information is not just about
customers. It may be important to get information
regarding a possible merger or about potential
suppliers or … or … or ….
3.1       Primary Research
Primary research is original research, which has
been conducted by the business (or individual)
via interviews, questionnaires, surveys and/or
observations.
3.2       Secondary Research
Secondary research is data that is already
available, because it has previously been collected
by another researcher. This data is available via
government agencies, trade associations, market
research companies or the business’s own research
department, etc.
===== PDF PAGE 44 (book page 42) =====
Activity 3
Use group discussions to decide (and motivate) if primary or secondary research would be used to gain
data and information on the following:
• Internal business analysis of sales patterns over the past five years
• Industry norms regarding financial indicators
• Competitors’ market share
• Global trends regarding awareness of issues in the supply chain
• Substitute products: availability and performance
4. Ethics in Research
•  If one considers the volume and type of
both primary and secondary research that is
undertaken in the world of business, it will be
clear why it is imperative that research is at all
times conducted in an ethical manner.
Some pointers to keep in mind when it comes to
conducting ethical research:
•  The business often has to get the permission
from the people who are being “studied” or
researched.
◊ For example: Doing research on how
Aids affects workers in the work place,
will require the people with Aids to give
permission for their doctors to make their
HIV/Aids status known to the researcher.
◊ However, sometimes it is not necessary
or even practical to get permission. For
example: If one wants data on how many
cars drive past a particular shopping
centre, the researcher will sit and count the
cars going by. There is no need to obtain
permission from each driver before the car
is counted and included in the study.
•  Some data has the potential to cause harm
to others (physical, emotional, financial, etc.)
In a case like this, it is important that the
researcher is aware of how the data that has
been gathered is used and that the source of
the data is protected.
◊ Think, for example, of a business that
wants to do market research on the number
of people who are active in a religious
organisation, but who also gamble at
casinos over weekends.
◊ If the research subjects (people
participating in the research) feel that by
giving information to the researcher it will
have a negative impact on their positions
in the religious organisation when they are
identified, they will not be truthful and the
research will be invalid.
•  The researcher has to be objective when
conducting the research. If the researcher
is subjective (allows personal opinions to
influence the research data), the research
and therefore the decisions made, will not
be accurate.
◊  For example: Kaizer Chiefs wants to find
out how many people over the age of 65
attend their soccer matches over weekends;
the researcher has to obtain the ages of
the people at the game. If he/she guesses
(subjective) how old the spectators are, the
research will not be accurate.
•  It is important when the findings of the research
are reported that they are accurate and a
true reflection of the surveys / questionnaire
/ secondary research and not “adjusted” to
support the hypothesis of the researcher or the
business paying for the research.
◊  For example: If your school asks a
research organisation research  how often
learners are dishonest in their tests, the
researcher should not adjust the findings
to “never”, because that is what the school
wants to hear. The true findings should be
reported, even if that means the school
has to acknowledge the problem and then
address it.
•  Plagiarism is dishonest and unethical
regardless of whether is it done when copying
homework or when you have to do research for
an assignment … Plagiarism involves copying
someone else’s work and saying that it is yours
(“copy and paste”). It is also using information
that has been changed into your own words
without acknowledging the source. The use of
or copying, without the required permission,
of any intellectual property or creativity with
copyright is also plagiarism.
===== PDF PAGE 45 (book page 43) =====
Activity 4
Google “unethical research” to find a case study / example where this happened. Tell your teacher which
incident you are using to prevent too many people covering the same issue. Present your findings to the
class in a creative two-minute presentation.
Additional activities
1. Why do businesses need information?
2. Differentiate between data and information.
3. Discuss briefly how businesses like Kalahari are gathering data about their customers.
4. Explain how good information can be used by a business to improve its performance.
5. What is the difference between primary and secondary research?
6. Explain the importance of ethical research.
7. What is plagiarism?
8. Why is plagiarism regarded as unethical?
