Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 5: Creative Thinking

===== PDF PAGE 46 (book page 44) =====
1. Some thoughts on
creativity
“It isn’t the incompetent who destroy an
organization. It is those people who have
previously achieved something and now
want to rest upon their achievements
that are forever clogging things up.”
— F. M. Young
“To be creative you have to contribute
something different from what you’ve done
before. Your results need not be original
to the world; few results truly meet that
criterion. In fact, most results are built on the
work of others.” — Lynne C. Levesque
“There is no doubt that creativity is the most
important human resource of all. Without
creativity, there would be no progress, and
we would be forever repeating the same
patterns.” — Edward de Bono
“Creativity is not the finding of
a new thing, but the making of
something different out of it.”
— James Russell Lowell (1819-1891)
“The things we fear most in organizations
— fluctuations, disturbances,
imbalances — in other words, the
primary sources of creativity.”
— Margaret J. Wheatley
“The way to get good ideas is to get lots
of ideas and throw the bad ones away.”
— Linus Pauling
“Creative thinking is not a talent, it is a skill
that can be learnt. Creativity empowers
people by adding strength to their natural
abilities which improves teamwork,
productivity and sometimes even profits.”
— Edward de Bono
“Others have seen what is and
asked why. I have seen what
could be and asked why not. ”
— Pablo Picasso
“To raise new questions, new possibilities,
to regard old problems from a new
angle, requires creative imagination
and marks real advance in science.”
— Albert Einstein
“If you do not expect the
u n e x p e c t e d ,  y o u  w i l l  n o t  fi n d  i t  . . . ”
— Heraclitus
CREATIVE THINKING
===== PDF PAGE 47 (book page 45) =====
Activity 1
Use the above-mentioned thoughts on creative thinking to formulate your own definition of creativity. Share
your definition with the class and add to your definition as your classmates present their definitions.
2. The 3 P model of
Creativity
The 3 P model of Creativity was first introduced in
1995 by Gouger. It is an easy and simplistic way of
explaining creativity from an entrepreneurial point of
view and is important to us in the Business Studies
class, because creativity is one of the essential
characteristics of a successful entrepreneur!
The 3 P creativity model consists of three key
elements:
• Person
• Process
• Product
2.1 Person:
Person
Process 3 P Creativity
Model
Product
• The person (entrepreneur / intrepreneur
and his/her team) is the most important
component of the creativity process in a
business environment.
• People often say: “I am not creative”, but
creativity is a skill that can be learned and
developed over time.
• The brain is “divided” into two sides, namely
the right and the left sides:
◊ The left side of the brain allows for thinking
that is more:
Rational
Logical
Detailed
Mathematical
Left Brain
◊ The right side of the brain involves thinking
that is more:
Right Brain
Emotional
Artistic
Imaginative
Flexible
===== PDF PAGE 48 (book page 46) =====
Activity 2
When you are solving problems, do you mostly use the right or left side of your brain? Motivate
your response.
• When considering both the left and the right brain thinking, we first need to understand what it takes to
develop a creative person.
• The following three factors characterise a creative person:
Creative Person
Motivation
Creative
Thinking SkillsExpertise
Expertise This would include a person’s knowledge, skills and experience that could be
applied to a particular situation. Knowledge, skills and experience are gained
through training, tasks performed in previous situations or through interaction
with people. Expertise is thus something that can be learned and gained
over time.
Motivation Motivation can be described as a catalyst that encourages an action – in this
case a catalyst that encourages a person to be creative. The person WANTS to
work towards solving a problem and he/she will think and rethink the problem
until it is solved. Motivation in its strongest form is about the person’s internal
need to develop something new and unique. Of course external factors can
also motivate people (a reward), but if the incentive is taken away, the person
is often no longer inspired if the motivation is not intrinsic.
Creative Thinking Skills The way in which a person thinks, plays a big role in the way in which the person
will approach (and eventually solve) a problem. People analyse situations and
problems in particular ways and then combine different ideas in several ways to
solve a problem. That is why ten different people may come up with ten different
ideas to solve the same problem.
Activity 3
1. Discuss how you have recently used your knowledge, skills and experience to overcome a problem
you have faced a few months ago.
2. If you had to face the same problem now, how would you approach the problem differently?
Give three ideas.
===== PDF PAGE 49 (book page 47) =====
2.2 Process
Person
Process 3 P Creativity
Model
Product
• Process (the 2nd P of the Creativity model)
refers to the process that is applied to
think creatively.
• The following diagram will help to demonstrate
a creative thinking process that a person may
go through in order to make money from a
creative idea or opportunity:
Identify an idea or
opportunity based
on a need that is
not satisfied
Rethink the idea
or opportunity till
you are sure you
understand the idea
or opportunity fully
Turn the idea or
opportunity into a
product or service
that can be sold at
a profit
Protection:
Patent / Copyright
• The first three steps of the process are the
“creativity steps”, while the fourth step is
carried out to make sure the effort is not
“stolen” by someone else.
• There are numerous creative thinking
techniques that can be used to help stimulate
creativity during the first three steps in the
above process to:
◊ Think more creatively to generate ideas
◊ Act more creatively to solve problems
◊ Analyse opportunities
◊ Identify a potential market that will
be prepared to pay for the problem-
solving idea.
• Some creative problem-solving techniques that
you are already familiar with:

SWOT
Analysis
PESTLE
Analysis
Creative
Problem-Solving
Techniques
Brainstorming
===== PDF PAGE 50 (book page 48) =====
Activity 4
Explain how a SWOT analysis, PESTLE analysis and Brainstorming could be used as creative problem-
solving techniques.
•  Consider the following new creative problem-
solving techniques:
Problem Reversal
5W and H
Association
Creative Probelm-Solving
Techniques
 A 5W and H Technique
This technique is also referred to as the questioning
technique and requires the person to ask the
following questions when faced with a problem or
when trying to think creatively:
WHO?
WHEN?
HOW?
WHERE?
WHAT?
WHY?
B Association Technique
•  This technique requires that a person
identifies links (associations) between related
or unrelated concepts, situations, objects,
processes or ideas to solve a problem.
•  For example: When a business has to decide
on which colour to use for their organic range
of products, they look at the link between the
products and nature.
• Just for fun: Here is a list of colour
associations. Think how different brands that
you are familiar with, use the colour to convey
a certain message to their target audiences:
◊  Blue: Trust, dependable, strength,
balanced, calm
◊  Red: Excitement, being bold and
daring, youthful
◊  Green: Peace, health, sporty
◊  Orange: Cheerful, friendly confident.
C Problem Reversal Technique
•  It will probably not be a WOW-moment
when you read the statement: All ideas and
arguments have a positive and negative or
advantages and disadvantages. You must have
heard this repeatedly during the first 9 years
of your school career. Being able to evaluate
information critically is a skill that is important!
•  The Problem Reversal Technique forces the
person to look at the idea / problem from the
front, the back, inside out, upside down, etc. in
order to consider the whole idea or problem.
•  The following process could help you to
complete a Problem Reversal Technique:
Change to the
reverse form:
E.g. negative into a
positive or vice versa
Use the 5W & H
technique
Assess what
other people are
seeing / experiencing
or even doing
Assess results
Change the direction
of your perspective
===== PDF PAGE 51 (book page 49) =====
•  For example: Instead of asking what is our
Competitive advantage – the business may
ask what are we really terrible at? Or instead
of asking how can we attract customers –
the business may ask how can we chase
our customers away? Then, (hopefully) do
the opposite …
•  A well-known practical application of the
Problem Reversal Technique is a Police
department (not in South Africa) that asked
themselves: Instead of us having to go out
and find the criminals, how can we make
the criminals come to us? They phoned the
criminals and told them each they had won
a nice prize. When the criminals arrived at
the venue to collect their prizes, they were
all arrested … 
Activity 5
Identify a problem that a business in your local community is facing. If you don’t know, do a bit of
research and ask the business owner / manager to tell you about a real-life problem. Explain that it is for
a Business Studies tasks.
Now use each of the three “new techniques” above to attempt to solve the problem. Do this in pairs and
then give feedback to the class. See if your class can come up with a workable solution that you can
present to the business / entrepreneur as a suggestion to solve the problem.
2.3 Product
Person
Process 3 P Creativity
Model
Product
•  The new innovation of a product
or service is a direct result of the
creativity model’s first two components
(person and process) discussed
above.
•  The following are possible ways for
the entrepreneur to come up with a
product that can form the basis of a
new business venture:
Fundamental changes
to an existing product:
These are completely
new ways of doing
something or solving
a problem.
Incremental changes
to an existing product:
Chere take place over a
period of time or where
changes are needed to
fix “bugs” in the system.
For example: Apps that
are being updated on an
ongoing basis.
Developing a completely
new product:
The development of a
new product to satisfy
current needs. But the
development of products
that create new needs is
also a possibility.
Finding a new
or better way to
produce the product
(production process):
New or better ways
of producing a
product / service.
Finding a new or better
way to produce the product
(production process):
New or better ways of
producing a product / service.
So the entrepreneur has an idea to start a business.
It is now time to consider how this money making
opportunity can be protected:
•  New ideas or products or services could easily be
copied and sold under a new name. For this reason it
is important that the entrepreneur protects his/her ideas
for products or services.
===== PDF PAGE 52 (book page 50) =====
• There are a number of ways an entrepreneur can go about protecting his/her intellectual property in
South Africa:
Patents
Protection
TrademarksLicencing
“Know-how”
Unlawful
competition Copyright
 A Patents
•  Patents are for the protection of new goods and/or services that did not exist previously or that are
adequately different from the known.
•  The following are types of ideas / innovations which are patentable:
Patentable
A new service
A new
production
process / method
A new product
• However, there are also “non-patentable” ideas / innovations in South Africa. The following fall in
this category:
Non-Patentable
Architectural
designs
Schemes:
investment and
insurance
Aesthetic
Creations: Fashion
designs
Business methods:
credit, stock control,
transport
Mathematical
methods
 B Licensing “Know-how”
This refers to know-how which could be licensed
to others for their use in return for a payment for
example, a franchise where the entrepreneur sells
his/her business knowledge to the franchisee.
C Trademark
•  A trademark is a logo or name which is
associated with a particular business in
the market.
•  For a trademark to be protected it needs to
===== PDF PAGE 53 (book page 51) =====
be significantly different from other registered
trademarks.
•  The registration of a trademark gives the
business the sole right to use a particular name
or logo while it is registered
D Unlawful Competition
•  This law prevents a person or business from
conducting itself in any manner that would
deliberately confuse customers into believing it
is the “original” business or offering the service
from the “original” business.
•  This law also prevents an employee from
using a previous employer’s know-how to
enrich him/herself or their new employer if they
do not have the right to do so.
E Copyright
Copyright refers to the copying of work without the
required permission to so do. Copyright applies to
literary works, films, sound recordings, engineering
drawings and pictures.
Activity 6
Steve Jobs said: “Innovation distinguishes a leader and a follower from one another”. Debate the extent
to which Apple uses creativity (and hard work) to be a leader in the market of technology.
3. Overcoming a Creative
Block
•  A creative block refers to the inability to solve
a problem or the inability to come up with a
process to solve a problem.
•  People often think they do not have the ability
to be creative, but it is not true.
“You can’t use up creativity. The more you
use it, the more you have.”
- Maya Angelou
•  The following are possible suggestions /
techniques to overcome a creative block:
Activity 7
Get into groups of four or five and discuss how each of you have in the past overcome an issue that
blocked your ability to think creatively.
4. Indigenous Thinking
•  Indigenous thinking refers the ways of knowing,
seeing and producing things which have been
passed down from generation to generation in
a particular area or country.
•  We refer to indigenous thinking as part of
creativity, as this way of thinking could help
solve problems in a unique and different way
that is unfamiliar to the rest of the world.
This may create a competitive advantage for
the business.
Stop avoiding or
postponing and just
do it!
Interrupt the
creative process by
deliberately doing
something else.
Quit! Sometimes it
is better to quit and
start over.
Do not be afraid to
make a mistake!
Dance in front of the mirror
or stand on your head. It may
sound weird but it will get your
blood flowing and will help you
to relax.
Always keep an open mind to
the possibility of new ideas or
ways of doing something.
Learn from others. We
live in a country where we
are surrounded by diverse
cultures. Reach out and learn
from one another!
===== PDF PAGE 54 (book page 52) =====
•  It is about going back to your grandmother’s
recipes and or your great-grandfather’s
remedies or the techniques taught to you by
your dad.
•  Indigenous thinking could, however, also
hamper creativity if it creates fear of doing
something in a new and innovative way,
“because it has always been done this way”.
Activity 8
Think about indigenous thinking in:
•  your family
• your circle of friends
Be aware of this indigenous thinking the next time an issue has to be addressed in your family / circle
of friends.
Additional activities
1. Define the term “creative thinking”.
2. To what does indigenous thinking refer?
3. Discuss how indigenous thinking could be used to gain a competitive advantage for a business.
4. True or False (motivate your response). Creative thinking can be taught.
5. True or False (motivate your response). The 5W and H technique is a creative problem-solving
technique.
6. Discuss three ways in which an idea could be protected in South Africa.
7. Explain how creative thinking could help a business achieve a competitive advantage.
8. How would creativity be used by a person who would like to become and entrepreneur?
9. Why is it important that a country like South Africa look to creativity to generate growth?
10. List TEN reasons why creativity is important in the 21st century.
11. How would you redesign your Business Studies classroom to transform it into a more creative place
of learning? Start with a brainstorming session in a group with four or five learners. Then eliminate
the most “unrealistic ideas” till each group has FIVE ideas. List this on the board and see if some of
them could be implemented. Who knows, you may come up with an idea that could be patented and
sold to other schools …?
