Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 8: Purchasing or Procurement Management

===== PDF PAGE 79 (book page 77) =====
The right
supplier to
deliver
The right quality
The right quantity
At the right time
At the right
place
At the best
price
PURCHASING O R PROCUREMENT
MANAGEMENT
1. Introduction
• The purchasing function is responsible for
buying all goods and services that are needed
by all the departments in the business.
These goods and services can be divided into
three categories:
◊	  Products that will be used in the business
to carry out the activities of the business,
namely computers or the stationery used in
the business.
◊	  Products that are bought with the exclusive
aim to resell them, for example, Pick n
Pay	buys	tinned	food	to	sell	to	the	final
consumer	at	a	profit.
◊	  Goods bought in order to use them during
the manufacturing processing may include
either	raw	materials,	semi-finished	or	capital
goods. Capital goods refer to the machines
and equipment used during production,
such as, the conveyer belts of tools used in
the manufacturing plant.
•  As with all other departments / functions of the
business, the purchasing function plays an
important role in trying to create and maintain
a competitive advantage for the business.
This can be done by focusing on the economic
principle. The economic principle: The
purchasing price and stockholding costs are
kept as low as possible in order to maximise
profit	and	thereby	improve	profitability.
•  Apart from working towards cost savings, the
purchasing	department	has	to	find:
◊	 The right supplier to deliver
◊	  The right quality and
◊	  The right quantity at
◊	  The right time and at
◊	  The right place at
◊	  The best price.
Activity 1
Discuss the importance of the purchasing function in a business like Pick n Pay.
===== PDF PAGE 80 (book page 78) =====
2. Purchasing Cycle
The Purchasing or Procurement cycle is illustrated below:
Identify business
needs
Receiving of order
Assess and select
supplierSend resources to
departments or
warehouse
Place order
Assessing orders
against invoices
2.1 Identify Business Needs
•  The Purchasing cycle begins with continuous
research being undertaken to make sure that
the	needs	of	the	different	departments	(and
customers)	are	satisfied	by	obtaining	the	most
suitable product and/or service.
•  The purchasing department should get in-
depth details on what should be ordered.
This will include information on the type, size,
colour, quantity, etc. of goods needed.
•  New and alternative products, services and
improved technology must be researched to
buy the best quality product that will provide
good value for money.
2.2 Assess and Select the best Supplier
•  It is important that the purchasing function
selects a supplier that will deliver on the needs
of the business at the right time, the required
quality and quantity at the place where the
goods are needed and at a reasonable price.
•  The most suitable suppliers must be found.
The Purchasing department has to consider
local and international suppliers.
•  The following are some factors that will
be taken into account when selecting the
right supplier:
Assessing
the Supplier
Price
CapacityDelivery
Labour
SupportReputation
===== PDF PAGE 81 (book page 79) =====
2.2.1 Price
•  The purchasing price does not have to be
the lowest price, but the most reasonable
price, based on the quality of the product,
the quantity ordered, after-sales service, the
time of the purchase, transport costs and
possible discounts.
◊	  The price is often determined by the
quantity ordered. If large volumes are
ordered, the business can negotiate bulk
discount, which will make the cost per
unit lower.
◊	  Cash discount is granted when the buyer
pays cash or when the debtors settle an
account early.
◊	  Seasonal discount often applies to
agricultural	products	(cheaper	during	the
high season) or on manufactured products
just before the end of the season.
◊	  Trade discount which is a reduction in the
listed selling price that the supplier charges.
This is often based on the length of the
relationship and the loyalty factor between
the two businesses.
•  The price charged for the resources or
products	will	have	a	direct	impact	on	the	final
cost of goods / services that are sold to the
end consumer and will therefore play a big
role in the overall competitive advantage of a
business in a market place.
2.2.2 Capacity
•  Capacity refers to the ability of a supplier to
supply the right quality goods / services in the
right quantities.
•  If the supplier does not have the capacity to
supply the necessary resources, it could have
a negative impact on the business’s production
system and this could result in unnecessary
delays for the business. This in turn will have a
detrimental	effect	on	the	profits	of	the	business.
2.2.3 Support
•  The purchasing function will need to consider
the	type	of	support	that	is	offered	by	the
supplier. For example:
◊	 	 Does	the	supplier	offer	training	on	new
equipment?
◊	 	 Is	there	a	guarantee	(after	sales	service)
on equipment?
◊	  Does the supplier deliver resources
ordered?
2.2.4 Labour
•  The purchasing function will need to have
a close look at the labour situation of the
supplier, as any possible labour unrest could
have a negative impact on the business
receiving orders on time.
2.2.5 Reputation
•  The purchasing function should do the
necessary homework to check the reputation
of the supplier and all role players in the
supply chain.
•  It is important that the supplier has a good
reputation, because if the supplier is involved
in unethical business practices, it could have a
negative impact on the brand of the business
which	in	turn	could	impact	the	sales	and	profit
of the business.
•   An example to illustrate the point:
◊	  In 2011 there was a huge outcry after
numerous employees of Foxconn, a
Chinese business that produces electronic
components used in Apple products,
committed suicide because of inhumane
treatment, by being forced to work
excessively long hours in small spaces for
unacceptably poor wages. Apple received
some negative publicity for doing business
with Foxconn and they had to address the
issue with Foxconn to convince consumers
that they would not tolerate such behaviour.
2.2.6 Delivery
•  It is critical to the success of the business to
determine whether the supplier would be able
to deliver resources on time. This will include
looking at the supplier’s warehouse capacity
and their transport and distribution facilities and
all logistical processes.
Activity 2
Imagine you are a Spaza shop owner. Use the elements above to assess whether Makro could be a good
choice as a supplier for your small business.
2.3 Placing of orders
•  Timeous placing of Orders and thorough follow
up should occur to ensure the correct goods
will be delivered.
•  It is crucial that the Purchasing department
develops a stock control system to maintain
the correct inventory levels. One such stock
record	system	is	EPOSSE	(Electronic	Point
of Sale Scanning Equipment). When goods
===== PDF PAGE 82 (book page 80) =====
are received the quantity of each item is
captured by scanning the bar code. When
an item is sold, the computerised system
automatically deducts the quantity sold and
when a predetermined stock level is reached,
the system informs the Purchasing clerk that
an order needs to be placed. Some systems
will even automatically communicate with the
supplier’s computer system by placing the
order, bypassing manual ordering.
2.4 Receiving of goods ordered
•  The business will have discussed the “time
frame” for the delivery of resources by the
supplier. When the raw materials or products
are delivered, a control system should
be implemented to ensure the quality is
acceptable	(goods	are	not	damaged)	and	the
correct quantity is received. The warehouse
clerk will be in charge of this process.
◊	  The supplier issues a delivery note which is
used when the quantity ordered is checked
against the quantity delivered to ensure
everything is correct. If all is in order, the
warehouse clerk will sign the delivery
note. Any problems should immediately be
reported to the supplier.
◊	  The warehouse clerk will complete a goods
received voucher to inform the Purchasing
department that goods have been received
in a good condition.
◊	  Details regarding the volume and type of
stock are then entered into a computerised
system in order to keep a record of stock on
hand. If the system is not electronic, a set
of stock cards are used to keep a record of
stock. Each stock item will have a separate
card to record details.
◊	  The invoice will be forwarded to the
financial	function	to	pay	for	the	goods
received.
•  The business must ensure it has the necessary
space available to store the products.
2.5 Assessing orders against the invoice
It is important that the purchasing function double
checks that all goods ordered have been received.
2.6 Send resources to departments or
the warehouse
Resources to be stored are sent to the warehouse,
but if the resources are sent directly to the production
department or other business units, the purchasing
manager should ensure that the necessary internal
distribution channels are in place.
Activity 3
Find as many words as possible that relate to the Purchasing Cycle in the following Word maze:
Created with TheTeachersCorner.net Word Search Maker
D I N S Z L T Z T B Y K R W A Y B O V E
P N F Z N R H N N N D Q X N X S C D C J
W V A Y O R X M E W G T N T S E I P M K
B E O N I T Z Y M T R L C T P K N J B S
B N W V T A P I E O O A A R E D C K G C
Z T R H A H J N R S P R Z E N W O O C E
W O N Z T B B O U A H N D Q U A L I T Y
K R N M U P U R C H A S I N G O B D C S
S Y B C P W V I O O D A M V F B O E C X
A A I C E W T W R A E G U S X X T C Z C
W P W L R Y T D P I L V Y O B X I A O U
T X A D U R E R J G I U L X O G M L J W
B C R I W R I V B U V W M L V Q E P S J
G O E U B C I W A O E H L B E V C Z U U
E W H L E Z I R P Q R W P L A E I O P D
H L O K E A R W G J Y W U Y Y H O N P O
R G U D A S Q U A N T I T Y P Q V P L Y
U O S A P A D F S Z G S R F E K N N I X
H U E Y B W J J H Y D S P L M K I J E K
C E O B J M Y T T I P T R O P P U S R Y
===== PDF PAGE 83 (book page 81) =====
3. Stockpiling and
Warehousing as part of the
Purchasing Function
•  Stockpiling is the process of ensuring there is
sufficient	stock	available	when	needed.
• 	 An	efficient	stockpiling	system	is	important
to ensure:
◊	  Any duplication of stock is eliminated, whilst
the required stock is available to be sold or
to be used in the manufacturing of goods. If
the business runs out of stock it will mean
sales are lost or the production process is
interrupted while the business is waiting for
raw materials.
◊	  The smallest sum of minimum working
capital is tied up in stock, as money
invested in stock could lead to other
opportunities	being	lost	(opportunity	cost).
◊	 	 The	risk	of	theft,	fire	and	stock
obsolescence is minimised.
◊	  Savings in respect of storage space and
handling cost are achieved.
• Warehousing is about the storage of resources
until	they	are	needed	by	the	different
business functions. The following are functions
of warehousing:
Storage
Postponement
Consolidate
Break-bulk and
Mixing
Warehousing
In	the	table	below	we	will	briefly	discuss	each	function	of	warehousing:
Storage •  Warehouses will store resources until they are needed by the business.
•  The business should ensure there are always more resources than what
is needed in the warehouse in case of an unexpected emergency or a
delay in the delivery process.
• 	 This	“buffer	stock”	will	protect	the	business	until	such	time	as	the
products or resources are received.
Consolidate • 	 If	resources	or	products	are	supplied	by	a	variety	of	suppliers	(as	is	the
case with most businesses), the warehouse acts as the central point
for all products to be kept, until they are transported to where they
are needed.
•  For example: All resources needed for production come to a central
place,	and	are	moved	to	the	manufacturing	plant	once	all	the	different
elements have been received.
•  Pick n Pay has a few central distribution centres across South Africa. All
goods	from	different	suppliers	are	delivered	to	the	central	warehouses
and	then	are	dispatched	to	the	different	stores.
Break-bulk and Mixing •  The idea is that the business is able to purchase large quantities at a
low price and then break the bulk and distribute the stock to where it
is needed.
•  Large quantities of the same stock item will be delivered to the
warehouse where the warehouse will “break the bulk” into smaller
quantities	in	the	different	combinations	needed	by	the	different	branches
of business.
Postponement •  Delays occur when products need to be assembled, labelled and
packaged according to special orders that have been placed.
• 	 The	different	elements	(labels,	boxes,	bubble	wrap,	etc.)	are	kept	in
the warehouse until orders have been placed. Thereafter they are put
together and dispatched.
===== PDF PAGE 84 (book page 82) =====
4. Stock Control
4.1 Types of stock:
• Raw materials refer to products that are
extracted in the primary sector, such as
sunflowers	from	agricultural	activities,	tuna
from	fishing,	wood	from	forestry	and	diamonds
from mining.
• Semi-finished	goods	have	already	been
processed	but	are	not	yet	ready	for	final
consumption. An example will be logs of wood
that are not ready to be used as furniture or
a polished diamond that has not been set in
a ring.
• Once	goods	are	ready	to	be	used	by	the	final
consumer	(individuals	or	another	business)	it
is	known	as	finished	goods	or	manufactured
goods. An example will be a tractor used by the
farmer or a school uniform.
•  Perishable stock can be in the form of raw
material,	semi-finished	goods	or	finished	goods
and requires special storage facilities such as
cold storage. This includes meat, boerewors,
cheese and fruit to name but some examples.
•  Capital goods refer to the machines
and equipment that are used during the
manufacturing process. The value of capital
goods depreciates over time due to wear
and tear.
•  Dangerous material must be stored according
to prescribed regulations, for example, there
should be a sign warning people about
flammable	and	toxic	material.
•  Maintenance stock is consumed within the
business, such as cleaning materials or oil to
lubricate machines.
4.2 Quantity management:
• 	 There	should	always	be	sufficient	(enough)
goods and services available in the
undertaking	(business)	to	meet	the	needs	of
the business and/or external customers.
•  We have already pointed out that minimum and
maximum stock levels have to be balanced by
looking at stock holding costs, ordering costs
and the availability of emergency stock.
•  The business will have to determine the
most economic ordering quantity. The most
economic ordering quantity is that quantity
of a particular stock item which can be
obtained regularly and stored at the lowest
possible unit cost. There are two important
aspects to consider when one thinks of the
most economic ordering quantity:
◊	 	 stock	ordering	costs	(transport,	insurance)
and
◊	 	 holding	costs	(insurance,	stock	control
costs, storage costs, etc.)
•  Many businesses would prefer to keep the
amount of stock they hold as low as possible,
as this would reduce expenses such as stock
control costs, wastage of space, damage
to products or goods becoming obsolete or
stolen, etc.
•  However, there are good reasons why a
business has to keep more stock than what is
available on their shelves:
◊	  The business may have to keep stock of
items that are not sold, but that are required
for operational reasons, such as till rolls,
light bulbs, cleaning liquids, etc.
◊	 	 The	concept	of	“buffer	stock”	has	already
been explained earlier in the chapter.
This is stock that is kept “in case” there
is a delay in the delivery of the new order
to ensure the business does not lose
customers to competitors. A manufacturer
will	also	keep	“buffer	stock”	stock	to
support the production process. A certain
quantity of stock will be kept to ensure a
continuous	production	flow.		The	business
wants to avoid situations that are caused
by transport delays, labour unrest or any
other reason.
◊	  The business could also receive discount
if stock is bought in large quantities. The
business may then decide to take the risk
of holding stock, as this could give the
business a cost advantage.
• One of the modern developments in the
process of stock control is known as the JIT
system. JIT refers to Just In Time.
◊	  This means that the purchasing department
plans	and	controls	the	different	purchasing
activities so that resources / products arrive
at the business just before they are needed
(Just	In	Time).	This	reduces	storage	and
stock management costs and ensures the
business remains competitive through a
cost saving.
◊	  The main advantage of this system is that
stock levels do not exceed the demand of
resources used in the business.
◊	  The Purchasing function will have to ensure
that the supplier that is used, is reliable,
because	almost	no	buffer	stock	will	be	kept.
◊	  The business may require a backup
supplier in case the preferred supplier is not
able to supply the necessary resources.
5. Economies and
Diseconomies of Scale
• Economies of scale refer to the business being
able	to	benefit	from	cost	advantages	due	to	the
size of the businesses, the volume of output
ability and the scale of its operations.
===== PDF PAGE 85 (book page 83) =====
◊	  If a business is able to process large
amounts of stock at a time due to the size of
its operations, the business is in a position
to buy large quantities and therefore it can
negotiate bulk discounts that will lower the
cost per unit.
Activity 4
Identify	a	business	you	believe	is	benefitting	from	economics	of	sale	and	explain	why	you	are	of	this	opinion.
6. Cash vs. Credit Purchases
• 	 When	the	business	is	buying	the	different
types of stock needed, it has to decide if the
purchases should be made cash or on credit.
This decision will to a large extent will be
subject to the cash available in the business
(and	would	occur	in	conjunction	with	the
Financial Function).
•  Suppliers may charge interest when goods are
bought on credit and this could have a negative
impact	on	the	final	price	of	goods	/	services.
•  Despite the interest charged, some businesses
may still prefer to buy on credit:
◊	 	 Buying	on	credit	improves	the	cash	flow	of
the	business	(cash	remains	longer	in	the
bank account)
◊	  If the goods are sold by the time the
supplier	has	to	be	paid	(after	30,	60	or	90
days), the business has already collected
the money owed to the supplier. This means
the business can use its working capital
elsewhere or keep it invested and earn
interest on the money in the bank.
•  When purchasing goods / services on
credit,	it	is	important	to	use	proper	financial
management skills to prevent the business
ending	up	in	an	undesirable	financial	situation
such	as	the	business	being	forced	to	sell	off
assets	(liquidation)	to	pay	back	the	debt.
◊	  Transportation costs to the business, but
also distribution costs will be less per unit if
the	truck	is	filled	to	maximum	capacity.
•  Diseconomies of scale refer to a situation
where the size and scale of operations have
a	negative	impact	on	the	cost	efficiency	of
the business.
Additional activities
Are	the	following	statements	(numbers	1	–	14)	True	or	False?	If	false,	motivate	your	answer.
1. Capital goods are machinery and equipment used during the production process.
2. Computers are programmed to order stock when predetermined stock levels or dates are reached.
3.	 Effective	buying	will	ensures	that	the	production	process	can	continue	without	being	interrupted.
4.	 Market research is done to select a supplier.
5. Storage bridges the time gap between production and consumption.
6.	 The Human Capital Function will determine minimum stock levels.
7. The most economic ordering quantity is that quantity of a particular stock item which can be obtained
regularly and stored at the lowest possible cost per unit.
8. The	purchasing	function	has	the	potential	to	influence	the	profitability	of	the	business.
9.	 The warehouse manager is in charge of storage activities.
10. Too	much	stock	will	affect	the	overall	profitability	of	the	business.
11. Trade discount is a decrease in the listed prices allowed between manufacturers.
12. Bulk	discount	is	offered	to	a	customer	for	prompt	payment.
===== PDF PAGE 86 (book page 84) =====
13.	 Stock that is out of fashion or damaged is obsolete.
14.	 There are three types of purchases, i.e. purchasing for own use, purchasing for resale and
purchasing for manufacturing.
15. Define	the	term	“procurement”.
16.	 Should credit purchases be viewed as positive or negative?
17. Discuss the objectives of the Purchasing function.
18. Why is warehousing considered an important element of the purchasing function?
19.	 Differentiate	between	economies	and	diseconomies	of	scale.
20. What are possible advantages and disadvantages of implementing a JIT system?
21. Why would a business like Spree be concerned with its economic ordering quantities?
