Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 11: Information Management (Administrative Function)

===== PDF PAGE 110 (book page 108) =====
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
(ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTION)
1. Introduction
•  The focus in this chapter will be on Information
Management rather than the traditional
Administrative function. The reason for this
shift in focus is the fact that information
management has become an important
component in every business function /
department at the present time.
•  The Information Management function has
thus absorbed all other business functions
and is no longer handled by a separate
department traditionally known as the
Administrative function.
•  Managers throughout the business are
required to make short, medium and long-
term decisions to respond to both trends and
crises that may arise. It is thus important
that information is accurate, reliable and
measurable so that managers are able to make
informed decisions when they need to do so.
•  Information management systems are normally
formal structures within a business. This
means that each business will, depending on
its size, geographical and production systems
have its own unique information management
structure.
2. Data, information and
information management
Data
Processing
data into
information
Actions
Information
Management
and decision-
making
2.1 Data
• Data refers to all the raw / unprocessed figures
and facts that are collected by the business or
the different business units.
•  As data are raw / unprocessed, they cannot be
used to base decisions on.
•  Examples of data could be sales figures,
production times, costs etc.
2.2 Processing data to turn it into
Information
•  Information refers to data which has been
processed via a transformation process known
as data processing.
•  For example: A business collects sales
figures from its different stores. The business
will then use different processes (usually
with the help of computer programs) to get
useful information such as sales per person
(if commission has to be paid), or sales per
region or sales per product category, etc.
2.3 Information Management and
decision-making
•  Information management refers to the
process where the information is used to
make informed decisions. If information is well
managed, the information management system
will allow management to access information
on its past and present to make well-informed
decisions for the future.
•  Management, for example, could look at
weekly sales, monthly sales, and quarterly
sales of a particular product to determine if the
business should continue to sell this product
or how much stock to keep at different times of
the year, etc.
2.4 Actions
Once the management have made the necessary
decisions, based on the information that has been
processed, action is taken, namely by reducing the
product range or ordering the appropriate volume
of stock.
===== PDF PAGE 111 (book page 109) =====
Activity 1
Choose any business that you are familiar with. Explain the type of data, information and actions that would
form part of its information management system. If you do not know any business well enough, use your
school in this activity.
3. Information Management
at Different Levels of
Management
Managers at different levels in the business have to make different types of decisions. For this reason they will
need different types of information that is presented to them in different ways to make the necessary decisions.
Top Management:
Strategic Decisions
Middle Management:
Tactical Decisions
Lower-Level Management:
Day-to-Day / Operational Decisions
This table will briefly explain how management at different levels use information to make different types
of decisions:
Lower-Level
Management
Management at this level use information that details daily activities in the business
and will mostly need internal information.
• For example: The production supervisor will need to assess the volume of
raw materials needed on the production line over the next week. He/she will
communicate this information to the Production manager.
Middle-Level
or Functional
Management
Management at this level will be concerned with information which affects the
medium-term running of the business. It is important to remember that this level
of management will collect information from the lower-level manager and process
this information to present it to top management. This level of management will be
interested in information from both the internal and external environment.
•  For example: The Marketing manager will want to collect information from
customers to make marketing decisions.
•  For example: The Production manager will inform the Purchasing manager of
stock to be ordered after he/she has decided how much of each type of product
needs to be produced in the next quarter.
Top-Level
Management
This Level of management requires information that gives the top level an overall
idea of what is happening in the business. Top management will use information
to plan for the future of the business, i.e. how to steer the business to achieve
its vision and mission. Top management will be concerned with both internal and
external information, such as what is happening in the political, social and economic
(etc.) environments of the business.
===== PDF PAGE 112 (book page 110) =====
Activity 2
Briefly discuss the decisions the different levels of management would make in Woolworths.
4. Requirements of a Sound
Information Management
System
•  We have already seen that the information
management system is the backbone of the
decision-making process and therefore it is
important that this system is worth the money
and time spent designing the system.
•  The following are general requirements of a
good information management system:
Information
Management
System
Quality and Quantity
Flexible
Reliable
Simplistic
Utility
Economical
4.1        Quality and Quantity
•  It is important that information is accurate.
The more accurate the information, the better
the quality of decisions by the different levels
of management.
•  There should be sufficient amounts of
information available (quantity) for the decision
makers in the business to make informed
decisions. For example: It would be more
effective for the Marketing department to use
information gained over a longer period of time
(last eight quarters / 2 years or even longer)
to try to identify trends, rather than base sales
decisions of the future on information from the
previous week’s sales.
4.2       Flexible
•  All businesses operate in a competitive and
ever-changing global environment.
•  It is important that the information management
system can be adapted to provide information
in various formats to help management to
make informed decisions.
•  For example: The system should be able to
give overall production cost. At another time
the manager may ask for information regarding
the cost of raw material vs. labour costs vs.
overhead costs for each production line.
Or maybe the costs per unit produced. The
Information Management system should be
flexible enough to allow management to extract
different types of information for different types
of decisions.
4.3       Reliable
•  Management will use the information to make
informed decisions about the short, medium
and long-term. Decisions can only be reliable,
if the information that it is based on, is reliable.
•  This means that the capturing, processing and
timing of the information needs to accurate
and available at the time when these decisions
have to be made.
4.4        Simplistic
• Often Information management systems are so
complex, that it is difficult for a non-computer
===== PDF PAGE 113 (book page 111) =====
expert to extract the information needed. The
more complex, the higher the costs (as a rule
of thumb).
•  The business has to ensure that the processing
of data to information is as simple as possible,
to ensure accurate and reliable information is
available to management at the correct time
and in an easy to understand format.
•  Information can be collected, processed
and stored in a centralised or decentralised
manner:
◊  Centralised: means that all information
comes to a point where the data is captured
and processed.
◊  Decentralised: means that information is
captured and processed at different points,
namely by each department or geographical
area.
•  Whether a centralised or decentralised system
is implemented, is not important; the business
has to ensure the system offers the best quality
of information in the most efficient manner.
4.5        Utility
The information management system has to assist
management by ensuring they are able to make
informed decisions. To meet this requirement, the
system has to provide meaningful information.
4.6        Economical
The cost of collecting, processing and storing
information, as well as the cost of maintaining the
system on an on-going basis, should not exceed the
value that the business will obtain from the system.
Activity 3
Discuss how the different elements of a sound information management system applies to the following
businesses:
A. Edcon (Edgars, Jet, CNA and a variety of other retailers grouped under this umbrella)
B. Your school
C. A spaza shop
5. The role of the
Administrative Function in
a traditional Information
Management
•  In a traditional Information Management setup
where all departments do not manage their
own information, the Administrative function
will assist all other functional managers by
providing information that is:
◊  Accurate
◊  Meaningful
◊  Available at the correct time
◊  Economical.
•  The Administrative function will be responsible
for collecting, capturing and processing
data and to store information. In addition,
the Administrative function will ultimately
compile reports as and when needed by
other managers.
•  The steps that will be followed by the
Administrative function to fulfil their obligation
can be illustrated as follows:
===== PDF PAGE 114 (book page 112) =====
Data Collection:
Data is collected from
both Internal and
external sources.
Data Classification:
Data is grouped or
classified into similar
catagories, e.g.
alphabetical, by region,
product line, etc.
Sorting and Processing
data: After data has been
classified, it is processed
to meet the needs of
the different managers.
The information is
arranged in a way that
provides more meaning.
Summary of Information:
In this step information
is summarised and
condensed (information is
reduced) to provide only
the  information needed
by management.
Storage: Information
is now stored. Today,
information is (mostly)
stored electronically.
The business will need
to ensure that it has a
reliable electronic storage
system as well as a
backup system.
Retrieval: The different
managers will request
certain information and
the administrative function
has to be able to retrieve
this information speedily.
Communication: The
administrative function will
ensure that all information
is understandable and that
it is communicated in the
most effective manner.
Additional activities
1. Define the following terms:
a.  Data
b.  Information
c.  Action
2. Discuss the types of decisions taken at the different levels of management.
3. Provide an example of information needed at each level of management.
4. Explain three elements of a sound information management system.
5. Why it is important at an information management system is economical?
6. What is the role of the administrative function during the traditional information management
process?
7. Differentiate between a centralised and decentralised information management system.
