Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 6: Professionalism and Ethics

===== PDF PAGE 55 (book page 53) =====
PROFESSIONALISM AND ETHICS
1. Citizenship Roles
The South African Constitution clearly states that
South Africa is a democracy where the rights of
human dignity, equality and freedom are guaranteed.
But with certain rights, go certain responsibilities.
Both businesses and individuals are considered to
be citizens of a country and as such, have to act in a
responsible manner in these roles.
1.1 Rights and responsibilities:
If one looks at The Bill of Rights which is included in Chapter 5 of the Constitution, there are very definite rights
given to the people and businesses operating in South Africa.
Constitutional right
What responsibility does that place on
the individual or businesses as citizens of
the country?
The right to just administrative action which gives
citizens the right to challenge each other regarding
the way in which they are treated if they feel it is
unfair. If a person or business feels they have been
treated unfairly, the issue can be brought before
the court and ultimately to the Constitutional Court.
Being able to do this is something that should give
citizens peace of mind, knowing they have the right
to challenge  fellow South Africans and even the
government on certain issues, if need be.
The responsibility to act in a manner showing
respect for other people’s and businesses’
rights and knowing if you do not respect these
rights, you can be brought to justice in a court of
law. Refer to the section later in the chapter about
contractual obligations.
People have political rights which mean they can
form a political party, run for office and support any
political party by voting for that party in elections.
This is a sign of a true democracy as this occurs
every time there is an election and new political
parties are registered.
Every citizen who has a voting right has the
responsibility to vote for a political party that has
the best interests of the nation at heart. Corrupt
politicians should be voted out of power, as they
harm the country and the citizens of the country.
People have the right to food and water and health
care.
Every citizen has the responsibility to treat the
country’s resources with respect. For example:
Don’t pollute! Don’t abuse the health care system!
Children under the age of 18 have special rights
such as protection from abuse and exploitation.
Even children have the responsibility not to abuse
and exploit others. For example: Don’t bully others.
People have a right to basic education. The right to education places a responsibility on
the learner to go to school and to learn!
Activity 1
Work in groups and Google “Constitutional rights in South Africa”. See which other rights you can come
up with and draw a table such as the one above where you can link different responsibilities to the rights.
===== PDF PAGE 56 (book page 54) =====
 1.2 Organisational culture and ethical
behaviour:
•  Organisational culture can be defined as the
common perception amongst employees of a
business regarding what is right vs. wrong and
acceptable vs. unacceptable behaviour.
◊  This common understanding is created
when the business clearly stipulates its
expectations regarding behaviour and
values in the business.
◊  The organisational culture will guide day-to-
day relationships in the business, but also
with stakeholders outside the business.
For this reason it is important to enforce
the desired organisational culture and to
ensure there are (negative) consequences
for employees who do not act according to
clearly defined principles
Activity 2
Write a paragraph on each of the following issues as “unethical issues that the business should
eradicate”:
•  Taking or offering bribes
•  Inappropriate gifts
•  Unauthorised use of business funds
•  Sexual harassment
•  Employees making confidential information about the business available to people with no right to
know the information
•  Insider trading
•  Employees abusing computers / electronic media that belong to the business
•  Employers that abuse or exploit employees (e.g. not allowing tea time / lunch breaks or any other
issue you can think of)
•  Conflict of interest
•  Tax evasion
•  Piracy (e.g. ripping off another business’s product or illegally copying music or movies)
•  How is a culture of ethical behaviour
established in the business?
◊  The first step towards establishing a culture
of ethical behaviour is to recruit and select
people who will act in an ethical manner.
◊  Management should lead by example and
act in an ethical manner at all times – in
their professional and personal lives. This is
called value-based leadership!
◊  There should be formal policies and ethical
codes developed in the business and
employees should constantly be reminded
of desired behaviour – through formal
training sessions, but also through informal
conversations and stories that are shared
amongst employees.
Activity 3
Have a ten-minute brainstorming session in class and identify FIVE ways in which ethical behaviour is
incorporated into your school’s culture.
1.3 Ethics in Marketing:
•  What is the difference between ethical
and legal?
◊  Something may be legal, but not ethical
in a particular situation. For example: It is
not illegal to sell basic goods and services
such as bread and medicine at a high price,
because we live in a free-market economy.
But what if the business is exploiting
the poor in the process, while making
exorbitant profits?
◊  On the other hand: Is everything that is
illegal unethical? What if a business sells
petrol at the price below the Government-
stipulated price and in the process
helps consumers?
===== PDF PAGE 57 (book page 55) =====
•  The following is considered to be unethical
behaviour when a business markets products
or services:
◊ Materialism, where false needs are created,
namely business advertising liquor to
rehabilitated alcoholics.
◊ Giving products deceptive names such as
calling a pizza a “Slimming meal”.
◊ When the business tries to deceive the
consumer by selling second-hand goods as
new goods.
◊ Any competitive advertising is illegal
(and therefore unethical) in South Africa.
◊ Using unacceptable language,
discriminating against the disabled,
gender bias or being racist is unethical
as it is seen as “cultural pollution”.
No form of discrimination is acceptable
when advertising or promoting
products / services.
1.4 Contracts and contractual obligations:
•  A contract is a written document or a verbal agreement that is legally binding between two or
more parties.
◊ The two parties entering into a contract:
Person making a offer Person/s accepting the contract

◊  Legally binding means that the court will force the different parties to honour the agreements that
were included in the contract. The following are elements which make a contract legally binding
between the different parties:
Contractual Capacity: This
means the person is legally
allowed to enter into a contract.
The legal age to enter into a
contract in South Africa is 18.
Sound Mind: The person
entering into a contract does not
suffer from any mental ilnesses.
Reasonable: The conditions
of the contract have to
be reasonable.
Possible: The activities that
form part of the contact must be
physically possible to achieve.
Legal: The duties carried out
as part of the contract must be
legal, i.e. no unlawful activities
are legally binding or protected
by the law.

•  A breach in a contract occurs when:
◊ any of the above requirements making
it a legally-binding document were
compromised,
◊  either of the parties fails to fulfil the
requirements as laid out in the contract,
◊  false or misleading information forms part of
the contract,
◊  a person was forced to sign a contract or
tricked into doing so,
◊  the requirements of the contract were
unclear to one of the parties. Note: Under
normal conditions, “not knowing” is not
an excuse in the eyes of the law; each
signatory thus has the responsibility to
ensure he/she understands what he/she
is signing.
Activity 4
Design a poster to illustrate your understanding of contracts.
===== PDF PAGE 58 (book page 56) =====
•  There are a number of different types of (legal) contracts that we will be looking at:
Contracts
Employment
Contracts
Insurance
Contracts
Lease
Agreements
Instalment Sale
Contracts
Rental
Agreements
Franchise
Agreements
1.4.1 Employment Contracts
•  An employment contract is an agreement
between an employer and employee where:
◊  the employee undertakes to perform certain
duties and to meet certain deadlines
◊  the employer promises to remunerate the
employee for the work done.
•  In South Africa any employment contact has
to be in line with the BCEA (Basic Conditions
of Employment Act). This includes, but is not
limited to:
Name and address of
 both parties
Employment Contract
Information
Job title
Job description and
responsibilities
Remuneration structure
Leave details
Notice period
Code of Conduct

1.4.2 Insurance Contract
• An insurance contract is entered into
between two parties, namely the insurer and
the insured.
◊  The insurer is the company that carries the
risk and that promises to protect the insured
against the possibility of loss, provided the
insured meets certain conditions
◊  The insured is the person who would like to
protect his/her assets against potential loss.
The insured will make a monthly payment
(a premium) to the insurer to transfer the
risk to the insurer.
1.4.3 Lease Agreement
•  A lease agreement is entered into between a
lessor and a lessee.
◊  the lessor is the owner of the goods
◊  the lessee uses the goods for an agreed
upon (usually monthly) fee, but the goods
never become the property of the lessee.
•  Examples of goods that may be leased include
furniture, machinery and tools.
1.4.4 Instalment sale / Hire purchase
agreements
•  An Instalment sale contract exists when a
seller allows a buyer to:
◊  pay a deposit
◊  immediately take possession of the goods
◊  pay the goods off in monthly instalments.
•  Ownership will only be transferred to the buyer
when the last instalment is settled.
•  The seller usually adds interest to the amount
that is being paid off by the buyer.
===== PDF PAGE 59 (book page 57) =====
•  An Instalment sale agreement is seen a credit
transaction and for this reason the National
Credit Act (NCA) must be applied.
◊  The NCA will help to protect the rights of
both parties that enter into the Instalment
sale contract.
1.4.5 Rental Agreements
•  A rental agreement is a contract between a
landlord and a tenant where the tenant rents
property from a landlord.
◊  The tenant will pay a monthly amount
agreed upon by the landlord and tenant.
◊  The property that is being rented never
becomes the property of the tenant,
no matter how long the tenant stays in
the property.
•  The rental amount is usually reviewed on a
yearly basis.
•  The Rental Housing Act (RHA) looks after
the rights of both parties involved in a rental
agreement in South Africa.
1.4.6 Franchising
•  Franchising is a legal contract between:
◊  a franchisor (the original owner of the
business concept), and
◊  a franchisee (the person who pays to
use the business concept to generate
an income).
◊   A franchise agreement will be signed by
both the franchisor and franchisee and this
agreement will stipulate the relationship,
rights and responsibilities of both parties.
◊  The franchisor promises to provide
ongoing training and support and to allow
the franchisee to use the brand (the
business concept).
◊  The franchisee promises to pay a once
off lump sum and thereafter monthly /
quarterly or yearly fee for the use of the
business concept.
•  A detailed discussion on Franchising will take
place in Grade 12.
Activity 5
Name the type of contract involved in each of the following instances:
A. Mr Khoza pays R3 000 to Sanlam in case his car is stolen.
B. Ms Jenner stays in a house owned by Mr van Zyl and pays R7 500 per month.
C. Graham is a baseball couch and receives R20 000 per month from Big Bad Baseball Club.
D. Brenda Bush has decided to open a pizza shop and buys the right to use the name “Debonairs”
from Famous Brands.
E. Mrs Smith would like to replace her TV. She decides she will pay R299 to Early Bird for the
following two years to use their TV. The TV will never become her property and after two years,
Early Bird will replace the TV and give her a new TV.
F. Mr Smith thinks the transaction described in E is a bad choice and he proposes they pay a
R500 deposit to Furniture City and a monthly instalment of R190 till the TV becomes their property at
the end of two years.
2. Self-management in a
business context
•  It is very important that any manager realises
the role that his/her performance plays in the
overall success or failure of the business.
◊  If a manager is effective in the role
he/she performs, the business will benefit
as a whole.
◊  An ineffective manager’s inefficiencies
on the other hand will most likely result in
poor performance with the potential to lead
to poorly motivated employees, a lack of
teamwork and unhappy customers.
•  Knowing personal strengths and weaknesses
and how these could impact on the business,
is an important part of being an effective
manager.
◊  A manager that knows which skills he/she
lacks could use this insight to surround
him/herself with people who can help to
compensate for what he/she lacks.
◊  Thus it is important that a manager is able
to take control of his/her own learning
and development.
◊  The manager should work on his/her
weaknesses and use his/her strengths to
create success in the business.
•  In grade 10 we are going to look at the
following elements of Self-management
(sections 2.1 – 2.7 that follow):
◊  Personal development
◊  Skills development
===== PDF PAGE 60 (book page 58) =====
◊  A balanced work-life
◊  Ethics
◊  Professional image
◊  Personal goals
◊  Self-Knowledge, Self-Confidence and
Adaptability.
2.1 Personal Development as a
Self-Management Concept
•  Before someone is able to determine what
his/her personal development goals are
each person has to go through a process of
self-assessment. Self-assessment is about
understanding:
◊  who you are as an individual (skills,
knowledge, thinking processes and
development ability)
◊  the effect (positive and/or negative) that
you have on people around you and your
working environment.
•  Personal development is a process of
“reconstruction” where the individual improves
him/herself by learning new knowledge and
skills through different experiences in order
to perform better in potentially unfamiliar
situations.
•  If the manager understands that he/she is
just human and that it is not always possible
to perform all activities on his/her own, an
alternative to personal development could
be that the manager surrounds him/herself
with key people who could compensate for
a potential weakness when the tasks are
delegated to them.
2.1.1 The JOHARI Window is a tool that can be
used to help someone to understand him/
herself better. A matrix is used to record
self-knowledge vs. what other people may
know about the individual. By doing this, the
person may become more aware of how he/
she is seen by others and where possible
development is needed.
Known to Self Unknown to Self
Known to
others
Open / Free
Area (1) Blind Area (2)
Unknown to
others
Hidden Area (3) Unknown Area (4)
Open / Free Area (1):
• This is information that the person knows
about him/herself AND that other people know
as well.
◊  For example: If you ask your Maths
teacher what his/her strengths are, he/
she will probably list the ability to work with
numbers. And if the learners in his/her class
have to list a strength, they will probably
also say “good with numbers”.
Blind Area (2):
• This area of the matrix is completed by
fellow team members. They are listing their
perceptions regarding the team member’s /
manager’s knowledge, skills and values.
• If team members are prepared to share their
views about a colleague, it will clarify issues in
area 2 (what the person does not know about
him/herself).
•  Although someone may experience this as
criticism, it is vital to listen to opinions if the aim
is self-development.
Hidden Area (3):
•  In a new business or a newly-established
team, people have to get to know each other
and share information about themselves for
others to become familiar with the strengths
(and weaknesses) in the team.
•  If the manager shares his strengths and
weaknesses openly, it will highlight area 3
(what other people do not know about you).
• People often feel very vulnerable to share their
fears and emotions and may even be hesitant
to mention their strengths for fear of appearing
arrogant, but in order to achieve success in the
team (business), people have to know what
each is capable of (or not).
Unknown Area (4):
• It is difficult to complete this block of the matrix,
because it refers to information (such as
hidden potential, emotions and fears) which is
unknown to the individual and to others.
• The goal is to minimise information which
could fall into this category, by getting to know
oneself. As an individual becomes more aware
who he/she is, this block will become smaller,
because experience in a similar situation has
taught the individual how he/she will react.
===== PDF PAGE 61 (book page 59) =====
Activity 6
Work in groups of four. Develop a JOHARI-matrix for each member of the group. Think about what you
have learned about yourself from this process and how you are going to use this information in future to
grow as a person.
2.1.2 SWOT Analysis
A SWOT analysis is also another tool that can be used to gain information about oneself. It is useful to assess
one’s own effectiveness, as well as considering possible opportunities and threats over which one has no
control.
Strengths
Opportunities
Weaknesses
Threats
!!!
Personal
SWOT
• Personal Strengths could include skills,
experience and/or knowledge.
•  Personal Weaknesses could include
disabilities or deficiencies, a lack of skills
and/or lack of knowledge.
•  Opportunities may come in the form of
available resources, new developments
(technology) or even diversity (and a variety
of other factors).
•  Threats could be the result of constraints
(time, money), competitors, and changes in
legislation, unmotivated friends / colleagues
and uncertainty (and a variety of other factors).
Activity 7
Complete a personal SWOT analysis. Think about how you are going to use your personal strengths and
external opportunities to make a success of your high school career. Also consider which weaknesses you
have to overcome and how you are going to respond to threats that you may encounter.
2.2 Skills Development as a
Self-Management Concept
•  There are a number of skills which are
essential for any person to be successful in
his/her role in life, regardless of whether the
person is in a management position or not.
•  We have already identified the JOHARI-matrix
and SWOT analysis as tools to make you
aware of skills you may lack (and thus need
to develop).
•  In the collumn to the right is a list of some
important management and life skills:
Workload and Stress
Time Management
Delegation
Skills development
Technological Skills
Communication
Assertiveness
===== PDF PAGE 62 (book page 60) =====
Know
your own
abilities
Trust your
 employees
Empower
your
 employees Understand
different
job roles
Understand
the abilities
 of others
Communicate
 effectively
Feedback
 and control
Delegation
2.2.1 Time Management
•  You have probably often heard your parents
or teachers saying, “Time waits for nobody”.
The merit of this statement reveals that it
is important for all to learn to manage time
productively by planning activities and tasks to
ensure the correct amount of attention is given
to what needs to be done.
•  In a business situation it is equally
important that the role of the manager is not
compromised due to poor time management.
Imagine if a meeting with an important client
were to be interrupted to deal with something
that could have been completed earlier
(or later).
•  Example of “time wasters” in a business
environment may include:
Unpleasant tasks being
left till last
Meetings not starting on time
Meetings not being
effectively managed
Poor Time Management
Poor prioritising of tasks
Poor Delegation
Activity 8
Record the use of your own time over a period of a week. Identify the times when you have not used your
time optimally and think of strategies that you could implement to improve your time management in the
future. Also consider where you have used your time correctly and what led to this good use of time (and
what the outcome was).
2.2.2 Delegation
•  Being able to delegate, without
micromanaging, is not something that always
comes naturally to people; it is nonetheless
an important skill that all managers need
to master.
•  It is important that the manager identifies the
skills and abilities of each employee, so that
work can be delegated effectively.
•  Delegation can be used to motivate and
empower team members; the manager,
nevertheless, will also need to explain to
the worker that responsibilities require
accountability for one’s actions.
•  When delegating, the manager should keep
the following principles in mind:
===== PDF PAGE 63 (book page 61) =====
Activity 9
You are organising a surprise birthday party for your gran who is turning 65 at the end of the year. As her
birthday falls in the November exam, you will not be able to do everything on your own. It is time to delegate!
Use the seven principles of delegation given  in the diagram to explain how you would allocate tasks to:
A. Your brother, a second-year student at varsity
B. Your mom and dad
C. Your little sister who is very creative
D. Your two best friends
2.2.3 Workload and Stress
•  Managers often spend the bulk of their days
planning the workload of employees and not
enough time planning their own schedules. But
if the truth were told, it is far more difficult for
a manager to plan his/her own day, because
often the “unplanned” interrupts what was
supposed to happen and this adds stress to
the manager’s day. Consider the following:
◊  Think of an employee who requires help
with a difficult client. It is not possible for a
manager to anticipate such an event.
◊  An employee has a personal crisis and
needs advice.
◊  Two employees have an argument and the
manager needs to intervene and address
the conflict.
•  Stress is a natural part of our daily lives and,
depending on how it is managed, it could have
a positive outcome or it could have negative
and even destructive consequences. Consider
some “stressors” (factors that lead to stress):
◊  Change
◊  Workload
◊  Too much responsibility
◊  Poor working conditions
◊  Job insecurity
◊  Financial insecurity.
Activity 10
Identify FIVE additional factors that contribute to stress in your life.
•  People deal with stress in different ways; the
first step is to recognise the symptoms or
indicators of stress:
◊  Low self-esteem
◊  Anxiety
◊  Irritability
◊  Trouble concentrating
◊  Tiredness / Problems sleeping (insomnia)
◊  Medical issues such as blood pressure
problems, depression, stomach problems,
headaches.
•  The manager should not only learn to cope
with his/her own stress by putting certain
strategies in place, but should also be aware
of “stressors” that may have a negative impact
on the productivity of employees. He should
also assist them to manage their stress. Some
techniques to handle stress may include:
◊  Know what causes stress in your life.
There will probably be different factors for
different people.
◊  Establish boundaries and learn to say
“no” (to yourself and to others). One such
example may be to learn not to look at your
cell phone every time a message comes
through. It may take up too much of your
time to read and respond to each message.
Rather wait till it is time to take a break and
then respond to your messages.
◊  Plan your activities and deadlines.
Do not procrastinate!
◊  Learn to relax. Take deep breaths, go
outside and kick a ball, read a book. Find
out what helps you to relax and make time
to “recharge your batteries”. You will find
that you get much more done if you take a
break when needed.
◊  Learn to ask for help. Asking for help is not
a sign of failure. It is a sign of maturity to
know and acknowledge that other people
can help you if you do not know how to do
something. DO NOT, however, transfer your
responsibility to someone else and in the
process add stress to their lives. Ask for
help, but remain responsible for getting the
task done.
◊  Eat well and ensure you get enough sleep.
===== PDF PAGE 64 (book page 62) =====
Activity 11
Think of a situation that has caused stress in your life. What strategies did you put in place to deal with this
hectic situation and what could you have done differently?
2.2.4 Communication
•  A successful manager should be able to
communicate effectively.
•  Communication includes a variety of formats,
such as:
◊  Verbal communication (talking face-to-face
or Skype)
◊  Written communication (emails, letters,
memos, sms, Whatsapp, blogging)
◊  Body language.
•  Body language is especially important during
face-to-face communication as a person’s body
language also projects a message.
•  To become a good communicator the
manager will need to work on his/her
communication skills.
• On the right is a diagram which shows the
various communication skills required by
a manager: Interpreting non-
verbal messages
Confident over the
telephone
Communication
Skills
Good Speaker
Good Listener
Sound use
of electronic
communication
Activity 12
Identify a situation where a crisis has occurred due to a lack of proper communication. Explain how
information should have been communicated to avoid this crisis.
2.2.5 Assertiveness
Being assertive is seen as the middle ground
between aggression and passivity. Being assertive
while remaining calm means the person has the
ability to voice his/her views and opinions without
emotion confusing the meaning of the message.
2.2.6 Technological skills
It is becoming increasingly important that managers
are able to use technology. Technology is becoming
an important element that supports the role of a
manager. It has the potential to simplify processes
and duplication of unnecessary work, but if the
manager is not familiar (and comfortable) with the
use of technology, it may make the task more difficult
and less productive.
2.3 Balanced Work-Life as a
Self-Management Concept
Balanced work-life refers to the balance between
time and effort that is put into the work situation vs.
time and effort invested in the person’s private life.
•  It is often difficult to maintain a balance
between work and private life, because
managers are expected to take unfinished
work home, or to be available to answer emails
from telephones. All of this means people may
be working 24/7 if they are not careful.
•  Research has shown that employees, who
feel that they have a balance between their
work and private lives, are more productive
employees. These workers are less stressed,
are more motivated and productive and even
take less time off from work.
•  The BCEA (Basic Conditions of the
Employment Act) prescribe working hours
===== PDF PAGE 65 (book page 63) =====
(per day and per week) and was introduced
to protect (especially vulnerable) employees
from being exploited in the work situation. The
BCEA also prescribes annual leave, sick leave
and family responsibility leave that workers are
entitled to.
•  In recent times the trend has been for
businesses to focus more on supporting
employees to achieve a balanced work-private
life. Businesses sometimes:
◊  allow employees to work flexible working
hours and/or to work from home
◊  provide support to employees during a
crisis at home such as a burst geyser, drug-
related problem with a family member, sick
child, etc. etc.
Activity 13
Find an article that discusses a Balanced Work-Life. Bring your article to class. Draw up a list in class of
what different businesses are doing to help employees achieve a balance between work and life away
from work.
2.4 Ethics as a Self-Management
Concept
•  Ethics is broadly defined as the difference
between right and wrong.
•  It is important that a manager is seen to be
ethical in his/her talk and actions.
•  Managers make decisions based on their skills,
knowledge and experiences.
◊ A manager should not only keep the vision,
mission and values of the business in mind
to ensure his/her decisions are perceived
as ethical , but more importantly, he must
ensure the decisions he makes have a
positive impact on the stakeholders of
the business.
Be guided by
pre-existing rules
Develop a sense of justice
and fairness Allow for input from others
Ensure that you do not act
out of self-interest
Choose the way which is
most beneficial to the needs
of most employees
Follow your gut
Develop an understanding
of the values and core
identity of the business
◊ In addition, any legal requirements have
to be adhered to. For example: When the
marketing manager has to decide how and
when and where to advertise a product or
service, the prescriptions and requirements
of the CPA (Consumers Protection Act)
should be adhered to.
•  It is difficult (and sometimes downright
impossible) to please everybody. This is why
the manager has the responsibility to gather
(as far as possible) all information about the
topic before a final decision is taken.
•  Consistency is crucial to ensure fairness to all
employees and other stakeholders.
•  When making these business decisions, the
manager should keep the following principles
in mind:
===== PDF PAGE 66 (book page 64) =====
2.5  Professional Image as a
Self-Management Concept
•  Managers need to be aware of the image they
project in the working environment.
•  A professional image will improve the level of
respect from the different stakeholders.
•  A professional image refers to the following:
Professional
Image
The type of decisions
you make
Ways of
interaction
with people
Your footprint on
social media
Dress
appropriately for
the job
The way you conduct
yourself around
people
The manner in which
work is completed
•  There are many resources available on
professional appearance that could be used by
managers to improve on their image. Some of
these resources include:
◊  Websites
◊  Books
◊  Courses
◊  Life coaches
◊  Image consultants
2.6 Personal Goals as a
Self-Management Concept
•  Personal goals can be viewed as a statement
regarding what a person would like to achieve.
•  People’s goals direct their learning (skills,
knowledge and experience) and daily actions
and, as such, personal goals are a critical
component of professional development.
•  Personal goals act as motivational tools to
help the individual to maintain a high level of
performance.
•  Like any other goals which are set, goals
should be SMART:
Specific:
Clear and concise
Measurable:
Goals should
be assessed:
before vs. after
Achievable:
Goals should
be realistic
Relevant:
Goals should
be relevant to
the person and
orgnisation
Time-based:
There must be a
starting and ending
time frame
===== PDF PAGE 67 (book page 65) =====
2.7 Self-Knowledge, Self-
Confidence and Adaptability as
Self-Management Concepts
•  Self-knowledge is about knowing oneself
and about understanding what drives
personal motivation.
•  Knowing oneself assists with a strong level of
Self-confidence.
◊ Self-confidence is the level of trust one
places in one’s ability to perform a particular
task or job.
◊ Self-confidence is about accepting oneself
with “warts and all”.
◊ Self-confidence is seen as a core
competency of successful people. It is
about the belief one has in oneself to
perform at a particular level.
◊ People who are self-confident focus on their
strengths which enable them to approach
new tasks assuredly.
• Adaptability refers to a person being flexible
around different situations and tasks.
◊ People who are adaptable are more likely
to accept change and even though change
is not always nice, it is part of the reality of
everyday life.
◊ Research has shown that people who are
willing to adapt are more likely to take risks
and self-confidence will probably lead to a
better chance of success.
Additional activities
1. Explain the concept of self-management.
2. Discuss how the JOHARI window could be used as a vehicle for self-discovery.
3. Discuss how the following terms link to self-management:
3.1 Time Management
3.2  Stress
3.3  Communication
4. Why is it important that managers are technologically savvy?
5. Delegation is seen as an avenue to empower workers, briefly explain how delegation may be used to
empower workers at different management levels.
6. Provide personal examples of where poor communication has led to conflict situations.
7. Explain different situations where the communicator should have demonstrated more effective
communication.
8. Define the term ethics.
9. Look for two ethical articles which show how a business has acted ethically or unethically. In each
case motivate why you say the business has or has not acted in an ethical manner.
10. What is the function of the CPA?
11. Why is it important that a manager remains assertive during a conflict situation?
12. Discuss the importance of a good professional image.
13. Differentiate between the following concepts:
13.1 Self-knowledge
13.2 Self-confidence
13.3 Adaptability
14. What is a contract?
15. Differentiate between the two parties as part of a contractual agreement.
16. List three types of contracts that are legally protected by the South African court system.
17. What does BCEA stand for?
18. List two types of goods that could be leased.
19. Discuss the criteria which make a contract legally binding.
20. What does the term “breach of contract” mean?
===== PDF PAGE 68 (book page 66) =====
21. Explain how the principal of your school has used the following skills to carry out his/her leadership
role in the school:
◊ time management    delegating
◊ managing workload and stress   communication
◊ assertiveness     technological skills
◊ energy management    decision-making
◊ teamwork
◊ effective relationship management (with internal and external stakeholders)
◊ technical management skills
◊ Describe TWO additional but relevant skills that he/she should have and motivate why you have
chosen them.
