Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 2: Entrepreneurship

===== PDF PAGE 23 (book page 21) =====
1. Introduction
The word Entrepreneur  originates from two French
words:
• entre which means “to enter”
• prendre which means “to take”
If these words are combined, it literally describes
Entrepreneurship as someone entering the world of
business to utilise an opportunity to make money.
By perusing the history of Entrepreneurship, it
becomes clear it was the French economist, Richard
Cantillon, who coined the term in the early 18th
century. Jean-Baptiste (also a French economist and
a follower of the work of Cantillon) emphasised the
importance of the Entrepreneur as an “adventurer
in the business” who looks at opportunities where
resources are not used efficiently and who then
reorganises these resources to be productive to
make a profit. Well-known British economists such
as Adam Smith, David Ricardo and John Stuart
Mill went a step further when linking the term
Entrepreneurship to Business Management with the
aim of making a profit.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
If one considers successful entrepreneurs like Henry
Ford, Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, Richard Branson, Mark
Shuttleworth, Tokyo Sexwale, Patrice Motsepe and
Elon Musk (to name but a few), it is clear that these
people did not accept the status quo in the market,
rather they have challenged the way “things were
done”, and by taking risks they reaped the benefits
of making huge fortunes.
So what is an Entrepreneur?
• An entrepreneur is a person who is able to spot
an opportunity or gap in the market and then
collects the necessary resources (factors of
production) in order to take advantage of the
opportunity identified to establish a business.
• The entrepreneur tries to grow the business
venture by creating a loyal customer base by
satisfying the wants and needs of consumers.
• The entrepreneur will continuously try to make
more profit (bigger reward), because the
primary aim of any entrepreneur is to generate
profit for himself/herself as compensation for
the risks taken.

Opportunity
Resources
Growth
Reward /
Profit
Risk
Entrepreneur
===== PDF PAGE 24 (book page 22) =====
Activity 1
1. Choose any three well-known entrepreneurs and write a paragraph on their success stories. At least
one should be a South African entrepreneur.
2. Discuss how each, of the above elements could be seen as driving forces that, motivates an
entrepreneur.
2. Push and Pull factors to
Entrepreneurship
Push Factors:
Unemployment
Job security
No formal training (can’t find a job)
Disagreement with current employer
Pull Factors:
Independence
Recognition
Self-actualisation
Personal employment and wealth
One of the Push factors listed above is Unemploy -
ment. Entrepreneurship is especially important in
South Africa because the EAP (Economically Active
Population) in South Africa ranges from age 15 to
65. This means people may start to work at the age
of 15 and (most people) retire by the age of 65. In
South Africa we have a very high rate of unemploy -
ment. Some estimations put unemployment roughly
between 34% and 43% (in 2020).
One of the reasons for this sad state of affairs is that
the population growth rate in South Africa is higher
than the economic growth rate. Simply put, this
means that there are more people born than jobs
created. In order to survive, people often have to
create their own jobs (entrepreneurs), because they
are unable to find work.
Activity 2
The class will be divided into different groups of about four people per group. Some groups will discuss the
above-mentioned “Push factors” and why they are called as such, while the other groups will do the same
for “Pull factors”.
Each group is to combine the notes on the Push and Pull factors into a coherent format. Each learner then
writes a paragraph that can be used to study for tests / exams.
===== PDF PAGE 25 (book page 23) =====
3. Characteristics of an
entrepreneur
Below are a few characteristics that can be used to assess people’s entrepreneurial traits / characteristics:
Opportunity
Seeking
Creativity /
Innovation
High risk
tolerance
Determi-
nationSelf-reliance
Flexibility
Motivation
Entrepreneurial
Characteristics
3.1 Opportunity seeking
• Entrepreneurs are people that are continually
seeking new opportunities as they are often
not satisfied with the current practices of doing
things or products and or services offered by
current businesses.
• They are seeking opportunities that will enable
them to make profit by finding better ways to
satisfy the customers’ needs / wants.
• In order to do this, the entrepreneur may have
to start a new business venture or simply
expand on its current breadth and depth of
offerings (additional products / services or
change existing products / services).
3.2 Creativity and Innovation
• Creativity and innovation are needed for
the development of new products / services
that could further satisfy the customer.
(As we already mentioned, this may require the
entrepreneur to start a brand new business or
just add to existing products / services).
• The entrepreneur has to identify a better and
more effective way of delivering a product or
service to satisfy the wants or needs of the
customer. This can be done either by:
◊ The introduction a product / service in the
market to make consumers aware of a
new need that they may not even know
about yet. For example: Before the first cell
phone, people had no idea they needed
a phone which was portable and enabled
calls anywhere.
===== PDF PAGE 26 (book page 24) =====
◊ The offering of a product / service that
would satisfy existing needs better - think
faster, more versatile cell phones.
• The entrepreneur will use his/her creativity and
innovation to create a competitive advantage in
the market.
3.3 Risk Tolerance
• The business environment is filled with
challenges and uncertainty and the
entrepreneur must be willing to take risks.
• The entrepreneur will be taking both a
personal and financial risk when starting a new
entrepreneurial venture.
• To minimise risks, the entrepreneur must
ensure the necessary research has been done
before entering into a business venture. Risks
taken should be calculated risks.
3.4 Determination and perseverance
• To start an entrepreneurial venture (new
business) takes determination, perseverance
and total commitment from the entrepreneur.
• A new business venture often places the
entrepreneur (and his/her loved one) under a
lot of pressure as it takes a lot of time, energy
and resources to make a business successful.
• Becoming involved in a new business
venture and ensuring its success requires the
entrepreneur to make sacrifices and remain
determined and focused on his/her goals to
overcome the many challenges ahead.
3.5 Self-reliance
• The entrepreneur does not wait for anybody
to tell him/her what to do, because an
entrepreneur is a self-starter that is resourceful,
prepared to make a decision and does not
depend on others to get things done.
• In order to be self-reliant, the entrepreneur will
need to master a wide variety of vital skills, but
if the need arises, he/she would not hesitate to
utilise a strong network (other people able to
make contributions) to be successful.
3.6 Flexibility
• Any entrepreneurial venture may face a
variety of challenges and uncertainties and
the entrepreneur has to be willing and able
to adapt current practices to overcome these
challenges and uncertainties while working
towards clearly defined goals.
• In order to adapt to challenges, good
management skills are required.
◊ The basic management tasks are planning,
leading, organising and control.
◊ Additional management tasks include
communication, coordination, delegation,
decision-making and motivation.
3.7 Motivation
• Entrepreneurs have a clear vision of
their strategies, formulation of plans, and
procurement and allocation of the required
resources to achieve his/her goals.
• Entrepreneurs usually have an internal locus
of control (internal drive) that motivates them
to succeed. This means the entrepreneur is
willing to take responsibility for his/her actions
and does not blame others for mistakes.
• This internal drive to succeed is usually based
on a strong sense of personal achievement.
If we use Maslow’s motivational theory, the
entrepreneur aims for the top of the hierarchy:
self-actualization.

Activity 3
Use the famous South African entrepreneur that you identified in Activity 1 and assess which of the
above characteristics the entrepreneur possesses. In each case justify your response with the necessary
examples.
4. Entrepreneurial business
venture
• The entrepreneurial business venture has
the potential to generate a profit and to
achieve growth.
• The following are three characteristics that
differentiate an entrepreneurial venture from
the average business that just tries to survive.
===== PDF PAGE 27 (book page 25) =====
Sound Objectives
Innovation
Growth Potential
Entrepreneurial Venture
4.1 Innovation
• A business that is just managing to survive
will maintain the status quo and keep offering
the goods / services that originally helped to
establish the business.
• An entrepreneurial venture is one that is
continuously looking for new and better ways
to satisfy customers’ needs and/or wants.
Many entrepreneurs are looking for ways to
incorporate technology in the product / service
offerings as consumers are becoming more
driven by technology.
4.2 Growth Potential
• A business that merely aims to survive is
satisfied with the current customer base only.
• An entrepreneurial business venture is always
looking for ways to grow by innovating and
offering its products / services to a broader
target market (new consumers or perhaps
entering a bigger geographical area).
4.3 Sound Objectives
An entrepreneurial venture is one that formulates
clear objectives and works towards achieving
them. To reach these objectives, the business will
need well-thought-out strategies. Some objectives
may include:
• Entering new markets
• Developing existing markets by growing the
current market share.
Activity 4
Choose a business in your community and assess this business using the following criteria:
• Innovation
• Growth Potential
• Sound Objectives
In order to do this, you may need to have a short interview with the owner or manager. Ensure you choose
a business where this is possible to achieve.
5. Types of Entrepreneurs
Although there are many types of entrepreneurs that exist, we will look at the following four types:
Techno-entrepreneur Social-entrepreneur
• These entrepreneurs look for ways to develop
technology or who use technology to grow
their business.
• These entrepreneurs start ventures to solve
social problems in society.
• These businesses are usually Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
Tourism Entrepreneur Enviro-entrepreneur
•  The Tourism entrepreneur identifies gaps in
the tourism industry and then offers goods or
services to attract tourists to the country.
• Examples may include hotels, sight-seeing
tours and selling souvenirs / memorabilia.
•  These entrepreneurs create a business venture
to solve environmental problems thereby
contributing to a sustainable environment.
•  For example: Businesses that sell solar panels,
bio-fuels or organic products.
===== PDF PAGE 28 (book page 26) =====
There have been some developments in South Africa over the last couple of years which have given rise to a
“new” type of entrepreneur:
New Entrepreneur
Informal
Entrepreneurs
Youth
Entrepreneurs
Emerging
Entrepreneurs
• Emerging Entrepreneurs
Emerging entrepreneurs is a term that is used
to describe entrepreneurs who have previously
been disadvantaged. The Preferential
Procurement Act has created a group of
entrepreneurs that focus on opportunities
offered by rendering services / selling goods
to the public sector. This has been an initiative
by government to encourage entrepreneurship
by giving preferential treatment to these
entrepreneurs when they tender for
Government contracts.
• Informal Entrepreneurs
The informal entrepreneur operates in the
informal sector. This means the entrepreneur
often has no fixed premises or formal business
location. There are limited legal requirements
and entrepreneurs operating in the informal
sector do not pay income tax.
This sector is growing as is evident from
the number of hawkers seen at traffic lights
or informal street markets. The informal
entrepreneur plays a positive role in the
economic development of a country as it
creates jobs, contributes to skills development
and even encourages growth.
• Youth Entrepreneurs
There are many Private-Public-Partnerships
(PPPs) initiatives that have been set up to help
encourage Youth entrepreneurship. These
initiatives assist in training the youth through
pro-active entrepreneurial programs and they
also provide the necessary resources and on-
going support to these budding entrepreneurs.
If Youth entrepreneurship can be grown in
South Africa, the country could see higher
levels of employment and hopefully this may
result in a higher standard of living for the
people in the country.
Activity 5
While driving to or from school, look around your community and identify an informal entrepreneur and then
answer the questions that follow:
• Do you think this entrepreneur is offering products/services that are in demand by the market?
Motivate your response.
• What possible growth potential do you think this particular entrepreneurial venture has?
• How would you go about assisting this particular entrepreneur to grow his/her business?
===== PDF PAGE 29 (book page 27) =====
6. Path to Entrepreneurship
The Entrepreneur identifies opportunities in the
market place that have the potential to satisfy
customers’ needs / wants. So how does the
entrepreneur go about establishing a business that
will be successful in satisfying customers’ needs /
wants? There are different options to consider:
Path to
Entrepreneurship
Franchise
Starting a new business
Buying an already
established business
Family Business
6.1 Starting a New Business
• Starting a new business is often more
complicated than buying an existing business.
• The entrepreneur will need to decide on
the best form of ownership and complete
the necessary formation procedures for the
business to operate legally. This is often a long
and cumbersome process if the chosen form
of ownership is a company. If the entrepreneur
does not register a company, he/she has the
risk of unlimited liability.
• Starting a new business is also more
costly than buying an existing one, as
the entrepreneur will need to purchase
all the assets needed to manufacture the
goods / services to satisfy the customers’
needs / wants.
• Setting up a new business is also more risky
than buying an already established business or
franchise that has a proven track record.
6.2 Buying an Already Established
Business
• If the entrepreneur has identified a business
that is for sale, he/she has to assess whether
his/her skills base match what is required to
run the business (e.g. to make the products or
render the services offered by this business).
• Buying an existing business lowers the legal
costs or effort to get the business going.
• Buying an already established business also
saves the entrepreneur the time of looking for
a new (suitable) location and building customer
loyalty. The entrepreneur should, however,
concentrate on maintaining customer loyalty,
especially if he/she wants to redirect the
business (has a new vision for the business).
• An existing business would probably already
have sound networks such as suppliers and
distributors in place which will make it easier
for the entrepreneur.
• It is important that the entrepreneur undertakes
the necessary research to ensure he/she is not
buying a failing business which the seller wants
to get rid of. Some entrepreneurs, however,
would actively seek to buy a failing business as
it would be cheaper and provide a challenge to
turn the business around.
• Below are some aspects the entrepreneur
should consider when buying an already
established business:
Reasons for the sale of the
business
The industry / market the
business operates in
The profitability of the
business
Customer base of the
business
Contracts the business has
already entered into
The business form of
ownership
Financial position of the
business
SARS (South African
Revenue Service)
requirements
Rental agreements
===== PDF PAGE 30 (book page 28) =====
6.3 Buying a Franchise
• Buying a franchise means the entrepreneur
gets a business where the name / brand is
already established and successful. A franchise
then duplicates the successful name / brand
across a wider geographical area.
• Entrepreneurs buy into franchises as they are
buying the right to use that franchisor’s name,
logo, production systems and overall success
recipe which has a proven and an established
customer base.
• A more detailed discussion of franchising will
follow in Grade 11.
6.4 Family Business
• A family business has often proven to have
a high success rate, as the entrepreneur
has usually grown up in the business and
understands the processes of the business and
the customer base.
• Family businesses have traditionally been
aimed at survival, but as newer generations
see the benefits of entrepreneurial ventures,
a number of family-owned businesses are
moving from survival to growth enterprises.
These businesses that have expanded or
rejuvenated the product / service offerings are
expanding into bigger geographical areas and
different target markets.
• Can you identify a business which started as a
family business and has grown over the years
to be much more than just a business aimed at
survival and supporting the family?
7. The Entrepreneurial
Process
Below is a diagram that shows the traditional
process that an entrepreneur would follow to start
and manage a business venture:
Identifying an
Opportunity
Developing the
business plan
Assessing Resources
Required
Managing the
Entrepreneurial
Venture
7.1 Identifying and evaluating an
opportunity
• The key factor of entrepreneurship is the
ability of the entrepreneur to identify possible
opportunities in a specific market.
• The entrepreneur should look for opportunities
which are attractive and long lasting.
• However, not all ideas and opportunities
are good ideas or good opportunities. It
is important to undertake both feasibility
and viability studies before any new idea /
opportunity is implemented.
◊	 Feasibility: Is the idea / opportunity
“workable” and can it be practically
implemented?
◊	 Viability: Does the idea / opportunity have
the potential to generate sustainable profits
and a ROI (Return on Investment)?
• In order to identify an opportunity and to
determine if it is feasible and viable, the
entrepreneur may have to do some research.
This means the entrepreneur has to investigate
the different factors from the macro and market
that may have an impact on the business
before drawing conclusions about the potential
of the new business venture.
◊ It is important to decide on the format of the
research instrument.
 »  For example: If a questionnaire is used,
will people be interviewed or will they be
asked to complete the questionnaire in
hardcopy or electronically?
 »  Alternative formats for research
instruments could be observation or
surveys.
◊ In order to make the correct decision, the
entrepreneur has to ensure he/she identifies
and questions the people in the target
market, i.e. the people to whom the product
or service will be sold.
◊ It is important to get a representative
sample from the target market. A conclusion
cannot be drawn and generally applied to
the entire target market if the sample of
people interviewed is too small.
◊ The target market should be asked
questions relating to their needs and
preferences to ensure the correct product /
service will be offered.
◊ The best location for the business should
be researched, such as proximity to the
target market, sufficient parking, good
security, nearness to complementary
businesses, etc.
◊ It is also important to look at competitors
to make sure the market is not already
saturated as this will limit the potential for
profit (unless it is a new and innovative
===== PDF PAGE 31 (book page 29) =====
product / service that will satisfy needs
more or better).
• The outcome of the research process, will
be that the entrepreneur is able to perform a
SWOT-analysis:
◊ The SWOT was discussed in great detail
in the Business Environment chapter.
You will remember we have said that it
is a tool which can be used to assist an
entrepreneur in creating a successful
business venture.
Strengths
Opportunities
Weaknesses
Threats
!!!
SWOT
◊ The entrepreneur would first start by looking
at the external environment of the business
in order to identify opportunities and threats.
 » Opportunities are those factors which
present gaps in the mark to the
entrepreneur.
 » Threats are those factors / challenges
which could cause the business to fail.
◊ Next the entrepreneur will look at the
internal business environment, i.e. the
strengths and weaknesses of the business.
 » Strengths are positive factors in the
business that have the potential to help
the entrepreneur to take advantage
of the opportunities by creating a
competitive advantage. Strengths will
also help the business to eliminate the
impact of threats.
 » Weaknesses are those factors which
hinder the business from taking
advantage of opportunities or achieving
a competitive advantage.
Activity 6
Complete a SWOT analysis for your school and describe how the different elements of the SWOT analysis
could help your school to become more competitive in the educational market.
7.2 Assessing Resources Required
• The opportunity will to a large extent dictate the
resources needed.
• The entrepreneur will need to assess the
availability of resources needed to start and
maintain the production of the goods / services
offered by the business.
• These could include financial resources,
raw materials, machinery and labour with
particular skills.
• One of the gurus of Entrepreneurship, Jeffry
Timmons, emphasised the importance of
people – and teamwork in particular – in the
success of an entrepreneur. The following
aspects of teams are important according to
Timmons’ Model of Entrepreneurship:
◊ It is vital that the correct team is put
together, as they will work together to
capitalise on the opportunity that the
entrepreneur has identified. The opportunity
will in other words determine the size of the
team and skills needed.
◊ According to Timmons, a great team is
capable of making a great opportunity even
greater. The team will brainstorm and use
their combined creativity to determine how
best to meet and exceed the customers’
needs by generating a (hopefully unique)
competitive advantage for the business.
◊ One of the main objectives of the team is to
ensure the economic principle is maintained
by minimising the input and maximising
the output. This will help drive down costs,
while still offering the customer a quality
product / service.
◊ According to the Timmons Model, the
correct resources and skills in the team will
help the business to overcome uncertainty
and to develop contingency plans to
face potential challenges while utilising
opportunities to make a profit.
7.3 Developing the Business Plan
• Once the entrepreneur has assessed the
feasibility and viability of the idea / opportunity,
it is important that he/she develops a business
plan that describes the business in detail.
• A business plan will help the entrepreneur
to determine the resources needed to take
advantage of the idea / opportunity identified.
• A business plan is also essential if the
entrepreneur needs to obtain funding. As a
financial institution (bank) will be interested in
the planning to be sure that the business has a
good chance of being successful.
===== PDF PAGE 32 (book page 30) =====
• A business plan helps the entrepreneur to ensure that all risks are identified, calculated and
proactively managed.
• The table below will discuss the possible sections of a business plan:
 Title Page: This page will include the name of the business, the physical address, contact
details, as well as the entrepreneur’s details.
Table of Content: The table of content will list the different sections of the business plan with
relevant page numbers.
Executive Summary: The Executive Summary will look at each aspect of the business briefly. This
section gives the reader an overview of the business.
Market Analysis: This section will look at the market the business is entering into.  It will also
assess and describe the customers’ behaviour patterns as well as relative
competitors.
Marketing Plan: The Marketing Plan gives details regarding the business’s marketing and
promotional strategies.
Financial Plan: This section of the business plan will provide particulars of the income earning
potential of the idea / opportunity, i.e. the viability analysis. It will also include
projected financial statements.
Production Plan: The Production section will give details regarding the entrepreneur’s plans to
transform factors of production into goods / services that will satisfy customers’
needs / wants.
Organisational Plan: This section will provide particulars of the necessary positions and skills needed
in the business. In addition, the Organisational Plan will give specifics of the
layout of the business and the key management tasks and activities within the
business.
Appendix: All additional, but important information that will add value to the understanding
of the Business plan will be included in the appendix.
7.4 Management of the
Entrepreneurial Venture
• The entrepreneur is responsible for managing
the business or appointing competent people
to do so.
• He/she will be planning, organising, leading
and controlling the different business activities
to ensure success.
Activity 7
Use the same informal entrepreneur identified above to develop a business plan the entrepreneur could
use. You do not need to approach the entrepreneur to share the business plan, as it may be viewed as
presumptuous if you start advising someone on how to run his/her business.
8. Growing an
Entrepreneurial Venture
• The primary objective of any entrepreneur is
the profit motive.
• To maintain and increase profit in the long-
term, it will be important for the entrepreneur
to look at the growth potential of the
business venture.
• The entrepreneur has to identify and build
on factors that will differentiate the business
from other similar businesses in the market
place. This is known as the development of a
competitive advantage.
===== PDF PAGE 33 (book page 31) =====
• The diagram below shows the different factors
which could give the businesses a competitive
advantage:
Competitive
Advantage
Price
Customer
Convenience
Experience
of the
Customer
Time
Product
Differentiation
As the business grows, the entrepreneur will face
challenges and crises that he/she has to overcome.
Considering that there are certain problems typically
associated with the different stages of business
development, it is important that the entrepreneur
takes into account the growth stage the business
is in:
Incubation
Start-up
Breakthrough
Maturity
Decline /
Rejuvenation
8.1 Stage 1: Incubation
• This stage is often called the pre-birth stage of
the business. The entrepreneur has identified
an opportunity and has assessed the feasibility
and viability or the opportunity and will then
prepare for the establishment of a business.
• What are possible problems the entrepreneur
might experience in this phase and which
solutions may be required?
8.2 Stage 2: Start-up
• Production and trading will commence during
this stage. Often “growing pains” are part of
this stage. Some problems may include: Not
reaching the break-even point fast enough
and large capital requirements for marketing
strategies and promotions.
• What are the possible problems the
entrepreneur might face in this phase and
how could they be solved?
8.3 Stage 3: Breakthrough
• During this stage of development, the rate at
which the business grows will increase.
• The entrepreneur will need to keep a close
eye on the factors of production to ensure the
correct levels are maintained.
• Managing this breakthrough stage is often
difficult as the business could face a variety of
problems such as:
Delivery /
Distribution
Cash Flow
Production
Complications and
Time
Labour and Skills
• How can these problems be solved?
===== PDF PAGE 34 (book page 32) =====
8.4 Stage 4: Maturity
• The business has reached a point where it has
established itself in the market; it has a loyal
customer base and has captured a share of
the market.
• The business will be distributing its goods /
services through established distribution
channels and the entrepreneur may try to
grow the market share or at least maintain the
market share.
• By this stage the entrepreneur will be enjoying
a return on his/her initial investments.
• What possible problems would the
entrepreneur encounter in this phase and how
could they be solved?
8.5 Stage 5: Decline / Rejuvenation
• The entrepreneur will need to protect the
competitive advantage by constantly looking
for methods to re-design products / services
and to prevent the business from reaching
this stage.
• If the business does find itself at this point,
the entrepreneur will have to make a choice to
close the business or rejuvenate the business.
A lot of creativity, innovation, patience, strategic
thinking and often a large amount of capital will
be required to achieve this.
• The business may have to consider relocating
to better premises/area, expanding the product
range or looking for a more focused / “niche”
approach to selling its goods / services.
• What possible problems might the
entrepreneur face in this phase and how
could these issues be solved?
Activity 8
Identify a business in your local community.
• At which entrepreneurial stage is the business currently? Justify your response.
• Which problems could be experienced at this stage and how might they be solved?
Additional activities
1. Define the term entrepreneur.
2. List four entrepreneurial characteristics and motivate how each of these characteristics could
contribute to successful business.
3. Discuss how a SWOT analysis could be used as part of the entrepreneurial process.
4. Why is it important that an entrepreneur puts a sound business plan together?
5. Which of the following elements is not used to assess an entrepreneurial venture?
A. Innovation B. Growth Potential
C. Sound Objectives  D. Suppliers
6. Illustrate the process an entrepreneur would move through while trying to take advantage of
opportunities.
7. Define the term competitive advantage.
8. Identify an entrepreneurial business in your community. Assess whether you believe your identified
business has a competitive advantage. If so, how is the business taking advantage of this
competitive advantage? If not, what do you suggest the business does to achieve a competitive
advantage?
9. What challenges do you think an entrepreneur could face? Suggest how you would have overcome
these challenges if you were an entrepreneur.
10. What is the difference between a small business and an entrepreneurial venture?
===== PDF PAGE 35 (book page 33) =====
11. Do you think you have entrepreneurial potential? Justify your response.
12. Are the following businesses entrepreneurial? Motivate your response by providing the necessary
examples:
a. Pick n Pay
b. Wimpy
c. Edgars
d. Your local hairdresser
e. Food Lovers Market
