Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 7: Teamwork

===== PDF PAGE 69 (book page 67) =====
TEAMWORK
1. Introduction
Teamwork can be defined as the combination of skills, knowledge and experiences of different individuals in
order to work towards a common purpose or goal. Some people find it easy to work in teams, while others
may prefer to work as individuals.
Activity 1
This is “for your eyes only” : Are you a team player or do you prefer to work on your own? Be honest
with yourself when you answer WHY?
•  Is it because you are always doing all the work and have to share credit with others? How can you
address this situation in future? Do you allow others to give input or are you “the only one with all
the answers”?
•  Are you the one who is always doing nothing and then sharing the credit with the people that have
done all the work? Will you be able to get away with this later in life or should you start to develop
your own skills NOW to be successful later?
•  Is it possible to go through life without being part of a team?
•  Think about people who have achieved great success in life because they have acknowledged the
role that other people can play to overcome their own weaknesses ...
Forming a team of people with the necessary skills
and knowledge does not necessarily translate into
successful teamwork. Human beings are complex:
Everybody has different levels of emotional, social
and intellectual intelligence. People all have different
needs, which make “creating the ideal team” a very
difficult task. The goal is to find the right balance
between team members, and to achieve this, much
thought has to go into the process of establishing
a team. Teams have the potential to achieve more
than the sum of the individual members (synergy),
or to create conflict amongst members which
could be destructive to the purpose of the team or
overall business.
Successful teamwork will hopefully lead to success
in the business when the skills, the abilities of
members and the drive of the team are combined
with the resources of the team.
2. Successful teams
•  Successful teams use the strengths of
individual members to overcome the
weaknesses of other members of the team.
It is important that all members of the team
share a common (team) identity to ensure they
support one another and that their efforts are
coordinated to achieve the common goal.
•  The success of the team depends on the
manner in which each individual buys into the
overall purpose of the team and the extent of
members’ support for one another.
•  Teamwork could suffer if there are problems
in the team: Poor communication, a lack of
organisation, misunderstanding, unclear or
poorly defined policies and a lack of skills
related to problem solving could all potentially
undermine the success of the team.
•  Successful teams have the following
in common:
◊  working towards a common and well-
understood goal and a shared vision
◊  honest and open discussions and
communication between team members
◊  good coordination and a willingness to
share tasks and responsibilities
◊  capable and strong leadership
◊  continuous team building
◊  well-understood policies relating to
conflict resolution, decision-making and
disciplinary procedures.
===== PDF PAGE 70 (book page 68) =====
Activity 2
Think of two different teams with which you have been involved – one successful and one unsuccessful.
What was the difference between the two teams?
3. Developing and
establishing a team
From the minute a team is put together until the time it
has reached its goal, the team goes through multiple
stages of development. As teams progress through
the different stages, different skills are needed and
developed. The traditional view of establishing a
team is that it comprises of four stages:
Forming
Norming
StormingPerforming
3.1 Forming
•  During the forming stage individual members
are combined to form a group or a team with a
common goal.
•  Introductions and socializing takes place and
members may sometimes be hesitant to offer
individual opinions to support the principles
adopted by the team.
•  During this stage it is imperative to develop
a common understanding of the purpose of
the team.
•  Team members have to identify the strengths
and weaknesses of the different members of
the team. This will help the team members to
identify the role that each member will play in
achieving the goals of the team.
3.2 Storming
•  This is a volatile phase where team members
are testing the assertiveness, agendas and
roles of fellow members.
•  Friction and competition for roles in the
team (including the leadership position) are
combined with a certain degree of negotiation
until team members have clarity on the roles
each has to fulfil.
•  Past experiences of team members will often
determine how they will act during this stage of
team development.
•  The successful completion of this stage will
set the foundation for the success of the team
later on.
3.3 Norming
•  During this stage, strong team cohesion is
formed. A common goal is identified and
accepted among all members of the group.
•  Ground rules that are set during this stage
include methodologies, framework for
behaviour, boundaries and disciplinary
procedures. This common understanding of
what is acceptable means that problems are
addressed during this stage.
•  The team starts to focus its activities towards
the task at hand. It is often during this stage,
that a strong sense of purpose and team spirit
is developed, because problems are viewed in
a collective, rather than an individual manner.
3.4 Performing
•  During this stage members actively work
together as a team.
•  Team members show loyalty to the team and
they represent the team as a group.
•  This stage is characterised by the significant
progress made towards achieving the actual
reason for the team’s establishment.
•  Each member of the team contributes
his/her strengths to the team and the team
works towards its goals in a strategic and
synergetic manner.
Activity 3
Explain (with examples) how a team of which you were part went through the stages suggested above.
===== PDF PAGE 71 (book page 69) =====
4. Types of Teams
Informal
Team
Formal
Team
Types of Teams
4.1 Informal Team
•  An informal team consists of a number of
individuals who choose to associate with one
another. These are individuals who form part
of a social group, based on their common likes
and dislikes.
•  They are often seen to participate in activities
after working hours, for example, social soccer
groups or having a beer.
•  These informal groups that develop are
valuable to employees’ morale, as these
groups give members a sense of belonging
and loyalty towards one another.
4.2 Formal Team
•  A formal team comprises individual members
of the business who have been identified by
management to form a team.
•  These formal teams will be responsible to
achieve the tasks and goals identified by
management, while management allocate the
resources that are needed.
•  Types of formal teams that can be found within
a business are:
Formal Teams
Multi-disciplinary
team
Problem-solving
team
Functional
working team
The table below will discuss each of the formal teams.
Functional working
team
This team includes individuals from a particular department who cooperate to
solve the different problems that the department might be facing. For example:
A department has been given instructions to cut costs and a group of individuals
are assigned to this task. They will use their combined skills, knowledge and
experience to solve the problem facing the department.
Problem-solving team This team is made up of individuals from different areas and their main focus is
to assist a particular department by looking at how processes in that department
could be improved. This team will discuss issues such as improved quality and
productivity, staff morale and the value added by the department as part of
the overall business. These teams are often referred to as quality circles and
help the department to get a 360 degrees (from all stakeholders) approach to
solving problems within that department.
Multi-disciplinary team This team could be a temporary or permanent team. The duration of the team
will be determined by the tasks and goals of the team. A Multi-disciplinary team
consist of individuals from different functional areas and may even include
individuals from different levels of management. This team will attempt to solve
specific problems that the business as a whole is facing. Issues that could be
on the agenda include concerns such as organisational culture, problems with
suppliers, identifying how the different functional areas should be integrated or
a lack of communication between different areas of the business, etc.
===== PDF PAGE 72 (book page 70) =====
Product development teams are considered to be a multi-disciplinary team,
because the different functional areas will all take part in the brainstorming
activity in order to contribute skills and knowledge from their functional areas
and perspective to ensure the new product adds to the competitive advantage
of the business and that it appeals to the target market.
Activity 4
Think of different teams in your school. Identify the following and motivate why you have categorised it
as such. If you can identify existing teams that meet the criteria, describe how you will put together these
teams to address specific issues in the school:
A.   Informal team                                                                   B.   Functional team
C.   Problem-solving team                                                      D.   Multi-disciplinary team
5. Benefits of a successful
team
The advantages of a group of people who successfully collaborate while combining their skills, knowledge and
experiences to achieve the goals of the team, are briefly listed in the diagram below:
Improved
confidence,
motivation and
personal satisfaction
Greater level of
brainstorming of
ideas / greater range
of ideas (synergy)
Clear
understanding
of members’
contributions
and roles within
the team
Sustainable use of
team’s resources
Flexibility:
responsive to
change, trust and
communication
Successful
team
Activity 5
Briefly discuss the success of a team of which you have been part. Make a list of the elements you feel
contributed to that team’s success. Motivate how these different elements could be used in a business to
ensure overall business success.
===== PDF PAGE 73 (book page 71) =====
6. Pitfalls of teamwork
•  Wasting of time could occur when team
members have disputes over personal matters
and this detracts from the focus of the team.
This could also be the case if individual team
member’s egos overrule the purpose of the
team and an individual wants to take all
the credit.
•  Members of the team could leave the team
which could result in a void. This becomes
dangerous for a team when a person leaving
the team has critical skills, knowledge and
experience that are essential for the team’s
progress. The team needs to be aware of
concession planning especially when the
projected lifespan of the project is long
or indefinite.
• Some group members may become so familiar
with one another and focus so much on what
has worked in the past that they no longer
challenge one another. This may create a false
sense of self-satisfaction which could diminish
the competitive edge of a group. This pattern of
behaviour is known as “group think”.
Activity 6
Think of different teams, which you as a member, have observed. Discuss at least three other problems
associated with (a lack of) teamwork which you have observed and explain how this has impacted on the
functioning of the team.
7. Team Roles
It is important to remember that as human beings, we all have a natural team-playing style. Each style
is important for the success of the team. Raymond Ackerman has written a number of books in which he
describes his career and the success of Pick n Pay. In these books he often suggests that people can be
coached to take on different roles / styles in a team.
7.1  Contributor
The Contributor is able to get the team to focus on
the task. He/she often has the technical know-how
and information needed by the team. This team
member will “push” the team to achieve gaols while
working towards high standards. A contributor helps
the team to find the best ways to use limited time and
resources to achieve the goals of the team.
7.2 Collaborator
The Collaborator continuously emphasises the
overall purpose of the team, while helping the team to
establish realistic goals and clarifying tasks needed
to achieve these goals. This team member is able
to see the bigger picture and will make certain the
team stays focused and on track. This team member
usually fulfils the role of the project manager in the
team, and as such, this is a person who is flexible
and is open to new ideas / ways of doing things
better.
7.3 Communicator
This member of the team encourages positive
relations between team members. The
communicator will emphasize the role that the team
is playing towards achieving the overall goals of the
business. This team member usually encourages
inclusive participation by all team members during
discussions and will ensure all members understand
what should be done.
7.4 Challenger
The Challenger is the member who is not afraid to
ask tough questions and to push the team towards
making tough decisions to achieve the goals. This
team member will encourage or even force team
members to take responsibility for risks and actions.
If needed, the Challenger is not afraid to disagree
with the team leader or the majority view. The
Challenger will assist the team to remain honest
about its progress and performance as it works
towards its goals.
===== PDF PAGE 74 (book page 72) =====
Contributor
Team Roles
Communicator
CollaboratorChallenger
Activity 7
Watch the following YouTube clips:
•  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-efhOLVgEvM
•  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mYL3aKON82U
•  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E95Vw5fbQhU
After watching the above-mentioned YouTube clips, decide which team role you usually fulfil. Motivate your
answer and suggest how your chosen role contributed to the success (or lack of success) of the team.
8. Achieving the Goals of
a Team
8.1 Project Planning
•  When teams work towards achieving a goal/
objective, it is important that careful planning
for the different activities ensures attainment of
the goals / objectives.
•  A project plan is a useful tool that helps the
team to look at the tasks at hand and how
best to perform these tasks systematically to
achieve the overall goal of the project.
•  It is useful to have a visual representation of
what needs to be achieved, as this allows
the team to consider the broader picture at
a glance.
•  The following steps could be taken to complete
a project plan:
Decide on the goal(s) of the team to ensure that all steps are aimed
at the overall goal(s).
List all the vital steps that need to be followed to achieve the goals
of the team.
Brainstorm potential problems the team may encounter while
trying to achieve set goals.
Identify possible strategies that could be used to prevent or
overcome problems as they occur.

===== PDF PAGE 75 (book page 73) =====
Example
• An example of a visual presentation of a project plan:
Project Plan
Goals/Tasks:
Vital Steps: Possible Problems: Preventative
actions / strategies:
•  The team will use this plan to monitor its progress towards achieving the goals.
•  This plan will also help the team to evaluate and control all proposed actions regarding the goals of the
plan to ensure everybody remains focussed and is not side-tracked by “trivial matters”.
8.2  GAP Analysis
•  The next step is to perform a GAP-analysis in order to keep track of the current state of tasks performed
by a team in order to bridge the gap between the current stats and the desired positions of the team.
•  A GAP-analysis ensures that all members have a shared vision (common understanding) of what has to
be done immediately to achieve the desired result / outcome of the plan.
Example
• An example of a GAP-analysis:
GAP ANALYSIS
Task/Goal:
Current Status: Desired position:
GAP: Plans to bridge the GAP:
9. Functional vs.
Dysfunctional teams
•  A strong, effective team is one that has an
understanding of how the different individuals
within the team contribute towards the
achievement of goals. Collective collaboration
between team members to achieve the team’s
goals is required as opposed to fulfilling
individual goals.
•  When the team fails to collaborate, it is
detrimental to the team’s ability to achieve its
goals and thus becomes a dysfunctional team.
===== PDF PAGE 76 (book page 74) =====
• Some of the issues (interrelated elements)
which differentiate a functional team from a
dysfunctional one are set out in the diagram
below:
Trust and
communication
Commitment vs.
Avoidance
ConflictResults
9.1 Trust and communication
When individuals in a team are not prepared or
comfortable to share ideas and opinions, team
members then function as individuals rather than as
a unit working towards the same goal.
9.2 Conflict
Conflict could be either functional or dysfunctional in
a team situation. The difference between whether a
conflict situation has a positive outcome (functional)
or negative outcome (dysfunctional) most often
results from the way the manager dealt with the
conflict situation:
•  Functional conflict leads to a better
understanding of one another and the overall
goals of the team.
•  Dysfunctional conflict hurts relationships within
the team and will have a negative outcome.
Dysfunctional conflict will also lead to team
members not being prepared to have open
discussions, as certain members may often
back off or withdraw in such a situation. The
result is that team members communicate via
the grapevine (“backbiting”), rather than having
constructive discussions of problems.
9.3 Commitment vs. Avoidance
When team members are not fully committed to a
team, they hesitate to mention or to raise important
matters and this may result in behaviour which is
counterproductive to the success of the team. A lack
of positive results may limit members’ willingness to
commit to the team goals or to accept responsibility
for the team’s actions. These members will avoid
committing themselves to the team.
9.4 Results
When team members are not prepared to accept
responsibility, the result is that members are not
holding themselves and each other accountable for
their actions (or lack of action). Members start to put
their own needs ahead of the team and this has a
further negative impact on the results or performance
of the team.
However, the above-mentioned elements could also
lead to high levels of FUNCTIONAL team behaviour,
if handled in the correct manner:
If members of a team
trust one another and
communicate about issues
in the team ...
they are more likely to
make sure that any conflict
situation is managed in
order to complete tasks.
Team members will
commit to decisions and
possible plans of action
that the team needs
to take.
Each member of the group
will take responsibility and
they will hold each other
accountable to achieve the
planned actions.
Collectively as a team,
they focus on the results
of the team as a unit.
10. Building the
Winning Team
Building a committed team is critical for the success of
any business, but it is not the exclusive responsibility
of senior management to build strong teams. Every
manager and every employee in the business will
contribute to the success or failure of the teams in
which he/she operates.
Building a winning team is about strong and positive
relationships among team members. A winning team
is not just about having people with the right skills
and experience; it is equally important to develop
working relationships among members to ensure
they help each other to achieve the overall goals of
the business.
===== PDF PAGE 77 (book page 75) =====
Herman Mashaba is a leading South African entrepreneur and founder of the successful “Black Like Me”
company. He suggests that leaders look at the following elements when building a successful team:
Elements to Building the Winning Team
Balance of Skills It is important that there is a balance of skills in the team to ensure that team
members complement each other. If a team performs a skills gap analysis
(identify the skills that they don’t have), members need to be trained to develop
the skills or a new member, who has the required skills, must be recruited.
Identify and Promote
Talent
It is critical that a manager identifies those individual employees who have
talent and then creates opportunities for these employees to grow and develop
by challenging them to gain experience where possible. Talented individuals
in the team must be developed or else someone outside the organisation may
recruit them.
Play to Strengths For a team to be successful, it is important that the members of a team
are utilised in the area or directed to perform tasks suited to the individual
member’s strengths. Doing this will result in tasks getting done more quickly
and accurately.
Develop People As part of identifying talent and playing to members’ strengths, it is important
that members are also developed to overcome their weaknesses. This
approach will result in more competent and confident members, and ultimately,
high-performance teams.
Lead by example It is vital that management lead by example. If a manager has certain
expectations of the team and individual members, his/her actions should mirror
the same level of commitment expected from employees. The manager should
also be prepared to assist members where necessary.
Prepared to Move
People
No team is successful if they are carrying “dead wood”. It has already been
mentioned that the manager must help members to develop and grow, BUT it
is important that the manager deals with “dead wood” (employees who are not
committed to the team and/or do not want to contribute).
Collective
Responsibility
It is vital that all members see and understands that they are collectively
responsible for reaching the goals of the team. It is important that teams have
open meetings to discuss issues, and when decisions are made, that the whole
team buys into the decision and works collectively towards achieving the goals.
Additional activities
1. Define the term “teamwork”.
2. Briefly explain the importance of sound teamwork.
3. List and explain three roles that individuals may play as part of a team.
4. What is the difference between a functional team and a dysfunctional team?
5. How can a manager ensure that a team does not become dysfunctional?
6. Sipho has recently been appointed as a team leader within a product development team. Sipho has
heard that it is useful to perform a GAP-analysis in a team. What advice would you give him as the
new team leader?
7. Explain how a project plan could be used to assist a business like Checkers when a new store
is opened.
8. Discuss how you would go about building a successful management team if you were the CEO of
Mr Price.
9. Draw up a set of criteria that can be used to assess the performance of a team.
===== PDF PAGE 78 (book page 76) =====
10. You have been asked by the CEO of Woolworths to conduct a workshop on the need for sound
leadership within teams. What are the main points that would form part of your workshop? Motivate
each of these points.
11. Explain how the following may hamper or positively contribute to the performance of a team:
◊  Prejudice
◊  Cultural diversity
◊  Values
◊  Emotional intelligence
