Business Studies Grade 10 Learner's Book (Consumo Publishers, 6th ed 2021)
Chapter 3: Forms of Ownership

===== PDF PAGE 36 (book page 34) =====
1. Introduction
• An entrepreneur is a person who would
“kick-start” a business into action. Starting a
business, however, involves more than just
thinking of a clever idea and then selling it in
order to make a profit.
• Running a business takes place within a legal
framework of laws and if the entrepreneur
FORMS OF OWNERSHIP
does not abide by the laws, or he/she makes
an incorrect decision, it could have serious
financial repercussions.
• The focus of this chapter is on which Form of
Ownership to choose to minimise risks.
• The diagram below gives a framework of
different factors to consider when choosing an
appropriate Form of Ownership.
Liability for
the debt of
the business
Tax
Implications
Continuity of
existence
Choosing the correct
Form of Ownership
Legal Persona
Management
and Control
Capital - size
of the business
Formation
Procedures
• The different Forms of Ownership or Legal
Entities discussed in this chapter are:
◊ Sole trader / sole proprietorship
◊ Partnership
◊ A company is also an option, but it will be
discussed in grade 11.
Legal Persona • Legal persona or personality refers to the legal right of a business or
person to enter into contracts, own property and sue or be sued.
• In order for the business to have a separate legal personality, the
business has to be registered. This will mean that the legal rights and
obligations of the owner and the business are kept separate.
===== PDF PAGE 37 (book page 35) =====
Liability (for the debts
of the business)
• Liability refers to what or who (the business or owner) will take
responsibility for the debt of the business.
• NOTE: It is NEVER the business that has limited or unlimited liability,
but always the OWNER that has limited or unlimited liability.
• If the owner has unlimited liability, he/she could lose his/her personal
belongings if the business cannot settle its debts.
• If the owner has limited liability, his/her personal belongings are not at
risk if there are insufficient assets in the business to cover the debts of
the business.
Tax Implications • This refers to who will be responsible to pay the tax on the profits – the
owner of the business.
• In South Africa we have a progressive tax system when it comes to tax
paid by an individual. This means the more the person earns, the higher
the percentage tax that is paid. The maximum is currently (2020) 45%.
• Registered businesses such as companies pay proportional tax. That
means that regardless of the amount of profit that is made, the business
will pay 28% tax on the profit. There is an additional 20% tax payable on
dividends (2020).
Continuity • A business will only have continuity of existence if the business is a legal
entity separate from the owners, i.e. the business is registered.
• If the business has continuity, the death or retirement of the owners will
not affect the existence of the business.
Management and
Control
• The owner of the business has to decide if he/she would like to be
involved in the day-to-day running of the business.
• The owner can decide at any time to appoint a manager if it is a sole
trader or partnership or he/she can continue to manage the business
him/herself.
• In a company the owners (shareholders) usually delegate the task of
managing the business to a Board of Directors, i.e. there is usually
separation between ownership and management. For each share a
shareholder owns in the business, he/she has one vote to elect the
Board of Directors.
Capital-size of the
business
• Capital refers to the amount of money needed / used for the
establishment and working of the business.
• The bigger the business the more capital will be required; therefore, the
entrepreneur will have to consider a form of ownership with sufficient
owners to contribute capital.
Formation Procedures • The formation procedures refer to the different measures a business
needs to go through to be established.
2. Sole Trader / Sole
Proprietorship
2.1 Characteristics:
• A sole trader is a business owned by one
person.
• The owner of the sole trader will contribute
all the capital by giving his/her own money or
borrowing money in his/her personal capacity.
• A sole trader is often chosen as a form of
ownership by someone who has capital and a
special skill to start a business. Sometimes a
special skill is carried over from generation to
generation namely, the parent is a baker and
teaches the child how to bake and the child
then takes over the business.
• The business is not a separate legal
personality, because a sole trader cannot be
registered. This means the owner is the legal
person and will enter into contracts on behalf of
the business in his/her personal capacity.
• The fact that the business is not a separate
legal entity, means that the owner will take
full responsibility for the debt of the business
– i.e. the owner has unlimited liability and
could lose his/her personal belongings if the
business fails.
• The business does not have continuity, i.e. if
===== PDF PAGE 38 (book page 36) =====
the owner dies / retires, the business will not
continue to exist.
• The owner pays tax on the profits generated by
the business. South Africa has a progressive
tax system, which means the higher the
income, the higher the percentage of tax that
the owner will have to pay (max 45%).
2.2 Advantages of a Sole Trader
• Very quick to establish as the business is not registered.
• No costs involved as the business is not registered.Formation procedure
• Takes all the profit, so the harder he/she works, the more profit
he/she will get.Number of owners = 1
• Quick decision-making, does not have to ask for input from others.
• Gains experience in all aspects of the business, as he/she has to
take responsibility for all aspects (marketing, finance, etc.)
• Often forms close relationships with customers who become loyal.
Management and
control
• If the profit is relatively low, the rate at which the owner will be
taxed on the profit, could be lower than 28%.Tax
• From the consumer’s point of view a large number of sole traders
means there is more competition, and this keeps prices low and
quality high.
Other
2.3 Disadvantages of a Sole Trader
 • The business cannot be registered, so there is no separation
between the  owner and the business.
• This means the owner has unlimited liability for the debt of
the business.
Formation procedure
• Growth is limited, because capital is limited to the amount that the
ONE owner can contribute or borrow.
• The owner has to carry all responsibilities (even if there are other
people working in the business).
Number of owners = 1
• The owner has to rely on his/her own initiative and does not have
somebody to discuss decisions with.
• The owner may not always have someone to take over from
him/her when he/she wants to go on holiday or if he/she falls ill.
Management and
control
• If the profit is high, the tax rate will be higher than 28%.Tax
• There is no continuity of existence, because there is no separation
between the owner and the business.Continuity of existence
===== PDF PAGE 39 (book page 37) =====
Activity 1
Complete the following table, by discussing the different elements of the framework for the form of ownership.
Criteria Sole Proprietor
Formation procedure
Legal persona
Tax implications
Continuity of existence
Liability for debts
Management control
3. Partnership
3.1 Characteristics of a Partnership
• A partnership is a verbal, written or even tacit
(implied) agreement between at least two,
but not more than 20 people to combine their
money and skills in a business.
• The partnership (the business) is not a legal
entity, because the business cannot be
registered as a separate legal entity from the
partners. This means the individual partners
are the legal entities and because they will
enter into contracts on behalf of the business,
they will sue or be sued.
• Profits and losses will be shared amongst
the partners according to a specific ratio as
agreed upon in the partnership agreement.
Other details in the partnership agreement
may include:
◊ Name of the partnership
◊ Address of the business
◊ Aims of the partnership
◊ Names and ID numbers of all the partners
◊ Contributions of each partner
◊ The percentage ownership of each partner
◊ Duties and responsibilities of each partner
◊ Decision-making procedures
◊ An arbitration clause, which will describe
the procedure for settling disputes
amongst partners
◊ Process to dissolve the partnership.
• The relationship between partners is based on
utmost good faith (ubberimae fidie), because
a partner binds the co-partners by his actions,
provided he acts in a responsible manner.
If he acts in an irresponsible way he will be
fully liable for any losses sustained through
the contract.
• The following applies to the liability of partners
for the debt of the business:
◊ Partners have unlimited liability for the
debts of the business. If the partnership
(business) does not have sufficient funds
to pay all debts, partners stand to lose
personal possessions to cover the debt of
the business.
◊ Partners are also jointly and severally
(separately) liable for the debts of the
business. This means that if one of
the partners is sued for the debt of the
business, he/she has to pay on behalf of
the business, but he/she can then claim the
money back from the other partners.
• The partners will (usually) share the
responsibilities of running the business.
Sometimes a partnership could have a
sleeping partner (a partner who does not
actively participate in the day-to-day running of
a business).
• If there is business growth, the current partners
may decide to raise additional capital by
bringing in one or more partners.
• Each partner will pay tax in his/her personal
capacity, based on the amount of profit
received from the partnership.
• The continuity of a partnership is dependent
on the lifespan of the partners. If one of
the partners dies or retires, the partnership
agreement is no longer valid and a new
agreement has to be signed. This means the
original business ceases to exist and a new
business is formed. A partner may transfer
his/her ownership, but this requires the consent
of the other partners.
===== PDF PAGE 40 (book page 38) =====
3.2 Advantages of a Partnership
• Easy to establish as the business is not registered.
• Very little involved to draft a partnership agreement.Formation procedure
• Two to twenty people can contribute more capital than a sole trader
– allows for the business to grow.
• Skills and knowledge that are combined could lead to synergy /
greater efficiency (1 + 1 = 3).
Number of owners =
2 - 20
• Better decision-making, because more people can share opinions
and experiences.
• Input from different people means responsibility is shared.
• Division of labour – each partner does what he/she is good at.
Management and
control
• If the profit is relatively low, the rate at which the partners will be
taxed on the profit, could be lower than 28%.Tax
• A partnership may be offered to a valuable employee to keep
him/her in the business.
• Harmful competition may be eliminated if different sole traders work
together in a partnership.
Other
3.3 Disadvantages of a Partnership
• If the profit is high, the tax rate will be higher than 28%.Tax
• There is no continuity of existence, because there is no separation
between the lives of the partners and the business.Continuity of existence
• Partners have unlimited liability for the debt of the business.
• Partners are jointly and severally liable for the debt of the business.Liability for debt
• The business cannot be registered, so there is no separation
between the owner and the business.Formation procedure
• Growth is limited, because capital is limited to the amount which
the TWENTY partners can contribute or borrow.
Number of owners =
2 - 20
• All partners have to be consulted before a decision is made and
this means slow decision-making.
Management and
control
===== PDF PAGE 41 (book page 39) =====
Activity 2
Complete the following table, by discussing the different elements of the framework for the form of ownership.
Criteria Partnership
Formation procedure
Legal persona
Tax implications
Continuity of existence
Liability for debts
Management control
Additional activities
1. Define the following terms:
a. Tax
b. Continuity
c. Legal Persona
d. Liability for debts
e. Capital
2. Explain the importance of a partnership agreement.
3. What information could be found in a partnership agreement?
4. What is meant by the term progressive tax?
5. Discuss five reasons why people may decide to form a partnership.
6. Which document is a prerequisite for the formation of a partnership? Explain the content of
this agreement.
7. Explain the concept jointly and severally liable for debts.
Give the word/phrase to describe the following:
8. The combination of two or more sole traders to form a …
9. The maximum ownership of this business is twenty.
10. Only one person is needed to form this business.
11. The owners are jointly and severally liable for the debts of the business.
12. This business is automatically dissolved with any change in ownership.
13. All the owners in this undertaking act as agents of the business and bind their co-owners by
their actions.
14. The statement in the partnership agreement that describes how disputes are settled.
