
===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 1 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to 
Java Programming 
1.1 Getting Started 
There are many programming languages available and they are all used to solve problems, Java 
being one of them. The process of problem solving is the same for any programming language. Java 
is a language that uses objects which will be explored throughout this book.  
A Java program consists of one or more classes. A 
class is a template from which objects can be 
created. To keep the problems visual, we are going to 
use a Gogga. A gogga is a Khoisan word for a bug or 
any creepy crawly insect. Gogga is the name we have 
given to a new class of objects which can move in a 
window with horizontal and vertical lines, 25 pixels 
apart, forming a grid. 
A class is the basic unit in Java for organising code. 
In most of the programs you create you will be using 
Java classes which have been written by other 
programmers. The Gogga class is an example of such 
a class, which was written by some of the authors of 
this book. In addition, you will be using many classes 
which are provided with the Java programming 
language written by the developers of Java. 
Java programs are often created in an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) which is a 
program which provides tools such as an editor for typing in program instructions in Java code and a 
syntax-checker which detects "grammatical" or punctuation errors. The IDE also allows your 
programs to be run and tested from within it. The IDE we will be using is called jGrasp and was 
developed to be a simple IDE to start coding Java. You can use another IDE if you wish to. Later on, 
we will move onto NetBeans which will be used to code programs with Graphical User interfaces 
(GUI) with windows. 
1.1.1 Downloading Files for Java 
Java is free and can be downloaded without any cost.  
• You will need to install the Java platform 8 (or later) which is available at: 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html 
• Once Java is installed on your machine you can download jGrasp from www.jgrasp.org. Install 
jGrasp. 
• Finally, to get the Gogga class to work with Java you need to download the it.jar file available from 
www.funworks.co.za under File Downloads in the Java files section. The it.jar file consists of the 
Gogga class and other classes. Copy the it.jar file to the C:\Program Files 
(x86)\jGRASP\extensions\classes path in the jGrasp folders on your C drive. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 2 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
1.2 Coding your First Program 
ACTIVITY 1  
Creating a Java application program.  A Java application is a stand-alone application that is designed 
to run on a computer or laptop. Refer to section 2.6.1 in Learning Unit 2 of Exploring IT: Theory 
Grade 10 for more about stand-alone applications. Open your program editor with a new empty 
window on your screen.  
 Type in the code for the MakeSquare class as shown below. 
// Your name Today's date name and date? 
public class MakeSquare 
{ 
   public static void main (String[] args) 
   {  
  //program instructions go here 
  
   } // main method 
} // MakeSquare class 
 Change the first line which is a comment so that your name and today's date is displayed. 
Java is case-sensitive, which means that it makes a difference if a letter is in uppercase or 
lowercase. In Java, public is not the same as PUBLIC, or even Public. Make sure that the M and S of 
MakeSquare are in uppercase and the rest of the letters are in lower 
A Java program consists of one or more classes. Every class must have a name that starts with a 
capital letter. If the class name has more than one word, there are no spaces between the words and 
the second word starts with a capital letter. The body of the class is enclosed in curly brackets. 
A Java program that can be run must have a main method, which always has the heading 
public static void main (String[] args)  (note the square and round brackets). 
The actual instructions to be carried out will be typed inside the curly brackets of the main method. 
The main method is the starting section of a Java program and is completely contained inside the 
curly brackets of the class. 
Java uses curly brackets to show the beginning and end of blocks of code. Each opening curly 
bracket must have a matching closing bracket. In the code above, the class has a set of curly 
brackets and so does the main method.  
Indent your Java code between the curly brackets to show that the main method is inside the Java 
class and the code to be placed inside the main method. 
You can leave blank lines wherever you like in a Java program. In fact, it is a good idea to leave 
blank lines between sections to make the program easier to read. 
 Save your program. Your file must be called MakeSquare.java.  
Put a full stop between the words MakeSquare and java with no spaces before or after the full stop. 
Java wants the file name with which the file is saved to be the same name as the class which 
contains the code. You IDE may add the .java extension for you. 
 Use the menus to Compile and Run the program. 
Compiling converts the program instructions in the .java file into Java bytecode and stores this 
converted program in a new file with the extension .class. Running carries out the program 
instructions. 
Code preceded by // is a 
comment and will be ignored. 
Use comments to explain the 
code in your program.  
===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 3 
If you have made no errors, you should get a message stating that your program compiled 
successfully. If there are errors, check your typing, save any changes and try to compile and run 
again.  
In this activity, you have only created an outline of an application program, which can be run, but does 
nothing!   
1.2.1 Creating an Object 
Java programs use objects which have properties. In Java code can be created to determine the 
behaviours of an object using its properties, in a similar way to any Object-Oriented Programming 
(OOP) language. 
The Gogga class can be used to create Gogga 
objects, which have characteristics (properties), such 
as colour and direction. They can carry out actions 
(behaviours), such as moving along the grid lines in a 
set direction. Gogga objects can draw shapes by 
leaving a trail on the grid.  
Gogga objects exist in an output window called the 
Gogga Grid. By default, the grid is 14 columns 
across and 9 rows down. The Grid can be saved, it 
can be printed, and the speed of the objects' 
movements can be changed.  
The Gogga grid shows a red Gogga facing UP at the 
intersection of column 7 and row 5. This is the same 
as using x and y values where x is 7 and y is 5.  
These are default settings for any new Gogga object that is created, if alternate values are not 
specified. 
ACTIVITY 2  
Adding program instructions to create a Gogga object. 
 Open the MakeSquare program, on the next line under the comment you added with your 
name and the date, but above the class heading, type the following Java statement: 
 import it.*; 
The it (eye-tee) package contains the Gogga class and other related classes. This it package must 
be imported at the beginning of every program that uses Gogga objects so that Gogga objects can be 
created and so that they can use methods from the previously created classes. The * means that all 
classes in the "it" package will be available for use in this program. 
 In between the opening and closing curly brackets of the main() method, type the following 
line: 
 Gogga bug = new Gogga(); 
The Java instruction Gogga bug = new Gogga(); creates an object of the Gogga class named 
bug and gives the object all its characteristics such as colour and position. It causes bug to be 
displayed on the Gogga grid at the default starting position (x = 7, y = 5).  
The Gogga object can be given any one-word name, such as flea, fred, x, or item. We have 
chosen bug for the object's name in this program. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 4 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
 Check that your program appears as follows: 
// your name and today's date   
import it.*; 
public class MakeSquare 
{ 
    public static void main (String[] args) 
    { 
        Gogga bug = new Gogga(); 
    } // main method 
} // MakeSquare class 
 Save, compile and run the program and watch the messages at the bottom of your program 
editor window, if they are available to you. 
 Check that the Gogga grid appears when you run the program and that a red Gogga object is 
shown on the grid facing upwards. (If not, check that you have copied the it.jar file to the 
C:\Program Files\jGRASP\extensions\classes folder.) 
1.2.2 Object Fields and Methods 
Objects have properties and behaviours as do objects in the real world. For example, an object of 
type dog has a colour (property) and can bark (behaviour).  
In Java, the properties or characteristics of an object are stored in fields and the behaviours of an 
object or the actions it can carry out are called methods.  
Method names in Java are always followed with opening and closing round brackets. 
Fields are also called variables which are named locations in memory (RAM). 
Objects created from the Gogga class have several fields. One of these stores the object's x-position 
on the grid another is its y-position. Another field stores the object's colour, which by default is red. 
Gogga objects also have behaviours - one of these is the ability to move. This action is carried out 
using the move() method. When used with a Gogga object, the move() method causes the object to 
move one unit in the direction it is facing. 
ACTIVITY 3  
Using the move() method of the Gogga class. 
 After the Java instruction  Gogga bug = new Gogga();  in which the object bug was created 
add the following statement on the next line: 
 bug.move(); 
bug refers to the object being used and move() is a method (a behaviour) which results in a Gogga 
object moving 1 block. 
A dot (or full stop) joins the move() method (behaviour) to the object which carries it out - bug in this 
case. This is called "dot notation". 
 Save, compile and run to check that the bug moves 1 block. 
 Add further Java statements after bug.move(); to make bug move up to the top of the grid, 
then save and run. 
1.2.3 Other Methods Used by Gogga Objects 
In addition to being able to move, objects of the Gogga class can use several other methods. Two of 
these are turnLeft() and turnRight() which make a Gogga object turn either left or right 90̊ from the 
direction it is facing. These methods do not move the object; they merely change its direction. 
This line is called a statement, which is an 
instruction telling the computer what to do. All 
statements in Java end with a semi-colon. 
===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 5 
ACTIVITY 4  
Using several methods of the Gogga class. 
 Change the program instructions inside the main method of your MakeSquare Java program 
to use move() and either turnLeft() or turnRight() so that bug will draw a square with sides of 2 
units and will end up facing in the same direction and same position as it started, as shown in 
the screen shot below. 
 Save, compile and run your program and check that it does work correctly. If not, change it until 
it does.  
Your code should be similar to: 
// your name and today's date 
import it.*; 
 
public class MakeSquare 
{ 
   public static void main (String [] args) 
   {     
      Gogga bug = new Gogga (); 
      
      bug.move (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.turnLeft (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.turnLeft (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.turnLeft (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.move (); 
      bug.turnLeft (); 
   } // main method 
} // MakeSquare class 
You should notice that the above code repeats 
the statements to draw one side 4 times, implying the necessity for a loop. We will use loops later in 
this book. 
1.2.4 Renaming a Program 
When you create a program you often want to add on to it or to change it but keep the original 
program as is. In order to preserve the original, you must give the program a new name and then you 
will have the original program with the original name as well as your new program. 
In Java, the name of the class must be the same as the file name with which the class is saved. 
ACTIVITY 5  
Changing the program to draw a square of 3 units. 
 Change all occurrences of MakeSquare to MakeSquare3Blocks.  
 Use the Find / Replace option which is usually in the Edit menu: 
 Enter MakeSquare as the text to Find and MakeSquare3Blocks as the text to Replace. 
 Select Replace All so that the name change occurs in all places in the file.  
 Check that the changes have taken place in your code on the screen. 

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 6 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
 Save the file with the new name.  
 Select File | Save As. Most IDE programs will show the Java class 
name as the file name to be saved with. If this is so, just click 
Save, otherwise type in the new file name MakeSquare3Blocks 
and click Save. Make sure that the file is saved with .java 
extension.  
 Now change this new program by adding further instructions so 
that bug will draw a square of side 3 units, instead of 2 units. 
 Save your program.  
EXERCISE 1 
1. Open the program MakeSquare. 
 Rename the program as MakeRect. Save this 
program with the new name. 
 Change the code so that the Gogga object draws a 
rectangle with vertical sides of 5 blocks long and 
horizontal sides of 2 blocks. 
 Save your program. 
2.  Start a new Java application program. Use class name 
Bumps. Save the class. 
Above the class heading add Java statements to 
• give your name and today's date as a comment 
• import all classes in the "it" package (one of which is 
the Gogga class) 
 Add code in the main method to create a Gogga 
object called flea which then draws the picture 
shown on the right using methods from the Gogga 
class. Save again. 
 When you run your program check that your output 
is exactly the same as that shown here with flea 
ending facing up and at position (11, 5). 
 Save your program.  
 

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 7 
1.3 The Programmer versus the End User 
When you are typing in the instructions for a Java program in 
the editor window you are in the role of the programmer. The 
window where you as a programmer type in the Java 
instructions is called the code window. Your purpose as a 
programmer is to code programs to be used by end users.  
An end user is somebody who normally does not understand 
any programming. They simply use a program such as 
MakeSquare and will see a square drawn on the grid when the 
program is run.  
The window that displays the Gogga grid (where the output or 
the results of your program is displayed when you run your 
program) is known as the output window. This output window 
displays what the end user sees.  
An important fact to realise at this stage is that there is a big 
difference between the code window and the output window. 
At this beginning stage of programming, you act as both 
programmer and end user; you are creating the programs and 
you are the only one running them. Later on, you will develop 
programs for other end users, so it is important to learn good 
programming habits from the beginning to make your programs 
as user-friendly as possible. 
At this stage your programs expect no input. Later on, you will 
code programs where the end user can input data into the 
program when it is running, and the programs will work on the 
input and provide output.  
1.4 Different Forms of Output   
The output you have seen so far is the graphical output produced by Gogga objects. A program can 
also produce text output. Text includes letters, numbers and special characters (such as *, %, $), 
most keys that can be typed on your keyboard and others. 
ACTIVITY 6 
A Java program that displays text output: 
 Start a new class with class name TextOutput. 
 Type in the following program (on the next page) on an empty screen in your Java editor. 
public class TextOutput 
{   
   public static void main (String [] args) 
   { 
      System.out.print ("Hello, 2 + 3 = "); 
      System.out.println (2 + 3); 
      System.out.println ("Good Bye"); 
   } 
} 
 Save and run the program and see what happens.  
The output alongside should appear on your OUTPUT window.  
You must use double 
quotes " in the brackets 
of the first and third lines 
of the main method. 
NOTE: The first line uses 
print, the second and 
third lines use println 

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 8 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
The statement System.out.print or System.out.println() uses the print() or println() method that 
will display (in an output window) whatever is in the round brackets after the method name. println() 
can be read as print and go to the next line. 
There is a difference when numbers are not placed in quotes in the brackets. 
 Add quotes to the 2nd statement:  System.out.println("2 + 3"); 
 Run the program. Note that the output changes to show 2+3 on the right of the equals sign, 
instead of 5.  
 Remove the quotes and the run the program again to check that the calculation is done 
correctly and 5 is output. 
Anything placed in quotes is displayed as it is on the screen. If there are calculations in brackets, such 
as (2+3), without quotes, then the computer will first perform the calculation and then display the 
result on the screen. 
The difference between the print and println methods 
 Change the first line of the program to use the println method instead of print 
 System.out.println ("Hello, 2 + 3 = "); 
 
In the output window, the 5 will be placed on the next line.  
The print method displays what is in brackets on the output window and the next output will be on the 
same line.  
The println method displays what is in brackets and the next output is on the next line. 
EXERCISE 2 
1. Change all three of the statements in the program TextOutput to use print methods.  
 Add a space before the 'G' inside the quotes as in " Goodbye" so that the output is clearly 
spaced out on one line.  
2. Code a new program called Greet that will display the message in 3 lines one below the other: 
 Hello! 
 How are you? 
 My name is Sam.    
3. Write down what will be displayed by the following code if it is run in a Java program: 
System.out.print("I am going");     
System.out.println(" to the");  
System.out.println("shopping mall."); 
System.out.println(); 
System.out.println("There is no bus"); 
System.out.print("may I have a lift?"); 
 
  

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 9 
CHECK POINT 1  
1. What is the difference between an 'App' and an 'Application'? 
2. What does a one-line comment start with in a Java program? 
3. What is the purpose of putting comments in a program if they are ignored when the program is 
run? 
4. What does it mean to say Java is case sensitive? 
5.      
5.1. Explain the purpose of this Java instruction: import it.*; 
5.2. Why is the * used? 
6. What punctuation symbol do statements end with in Java? 
7. Write down a Java statement to create an object of the Gogga class called slug. 
8. What is another term for the properties of an object? 
9. What is the Java term for the behaviours or actions that an object can carry out? 
10. What type of brackets are used to begin and end a class or a method? 
11. Write down two methods besides move() that can be used with objects of the Gogga class. 
12. You want to give your program another class name. Write down all the steps you need to 
successfully change the name of a program in Java and save the program with the new class 
name. 
13. What is the difference between: 
13.1. an end user and a programmer? 
13.2. a code (or editor) window and the output window? 
 
1.5 How do Gogga Objects Get or Change their Field Values? 
In the programs you have coded, objects of the Gogga class have been created to use methods such 
as move() and turnLeft(). For example, to create a Gogga object called tic, the statement Gogga 
tic = new Gogga(); is used. The object is created with the new operator and a special 
constructor method Gogga() which has the same name as the class.  
Gogga() is called a constructor method and it assigns values to the field variables of the Gogga 
object. By default, the Gogga object field variables will store the colour red, the up direction and x 
and y values that position it roughly in the middle of the screen when the object is created. 
What if we want to change the values in some or all these variables?  The values in the x-and y-
position variables can be changed by methods such as move(). There are other methods in the 
Gogga class that we can also use to change field values. They are detailed in the following table: 
(Assume that a Gogga object called bug has already been created using the new operator.) 
===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 10 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
Method What it does How to use the method 
setPosition (x,y) Changes the position of the 
Gogga object to the new x 
and y coordinates. (The 
direction of the Gogga 
object stays the same and 
a trail is NOT drawn from 
the old position to the new 
position.) 
bug.setPosition (4,3); 
will put bug at position 4,3 in the grid. 
setDirection(dir) Changes the direction of 
the Gogga object. The 
directions are: Gogga.UP, 
Gogga.DOWN, 
Gogga.LEFT and 
Gogga.RIGHT 
bug.setDirection(Gogga.DOWN); 
will make bug face down. 
setColor (col) Changes the colour of the 
Gogga object and its trail. 
The change in the trail will 
only be seen after the next 
move() method is 
executed. To use this 
method, you must add  
import java.awt.*; at 
the top of your program. 
bug.setColor(Color.blue); 
will change the colour of bug's trail to 
blue. 
 
Note the American spelling of Color 
setTrailwidth (num) Changes the width of the 
Gogga object's trail. If it is 
set to 0, it will leave no trail. 
bug.setTrailWidth (8); 
will change the width of bug's trail to 8 
pixels when the next  move () 
statement executes. 
setLabel (label) Shows a text label next to 
the Gogga object. 
bug.setLabel("Fred"); 
will place the text "Fred" next to bug. 
It will follow bug as it moves. Note that 
the text label is placed in double 
quotes. 
trailOn() Turns the Gogga object's 
trail on. The change will 
only be seen with the next 
move () command. (If the 
trail is already on, it will not 
cause an error.) 
bug.trailOn(); 
will show bug's trail the next time he is 
moved. 
trailOff() Turns the Gogga object's 
trail off. The change will 
only be seen with the next 
move () command. (If the 
trail is already off, it will not 
cause an error.) 
bug.trailOff(); 
will not show bug's trail the next time 
he is moved. 
Notice from the previous table that the setPosition method needs two numbers in round brackets to 
work. These numbers in round brackets after the method name are called parameters.  
The setColor method needs a single parameter and the move() method needs no parameters.  
It is important to know (or be able to look up) the parameters expected by methods. When a method 
is used in a program, it is known as a method call or a method call statement.  
===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 11 
The call statement transfers control to the definition of the method (which is stored somewhere on 
your computer). The definition of the method consists of a list of Java instructions that tell Java how to 
carry out the method.   
For example, the statement  bug.setPosition(7, 2); is a call statement to the setPosition() 
method which makes Java find the setPosition() method's definition and carry it out using the 
values 7 for x and 2 for y, which causes the object bug to move to the position (7, 2) on the grid. 
ACTIVITY 7 
Using the methods of the Gogga class. 
 Start a new Java application program called TestGoggaMethods. We will try out all the Gogga 
methods to see what the resulting behaviours are. 
 Add your name and the date as a comment at the top of the program. 
 Add the statement (above the class heading) to import the "it" package of classes. 
 In the body of the main method, type an instruction to create a Gogga object called kreepy, 
using the constructor method Gogga().  
Gogga kreepy = new Gogga(); 
 After this, type instructions to use kreepy with some of the other Gogga methods: 
 kreepy.setPosition(3,1); 
 kreepy.setDirection (Gogga.RIGHT); 
 kreepy.setLabel("kreepy"); 
 kreepy.setTrailWidth (9); 
 kreepy.move(); 
 kreepy.move(); 
 kreepy.move(); 
 kreepy.move();     
 kreepy.move(); 
 kreepy.trailOff(); 
 kreepy.move(); 
 kreepy.move (); 
 kreepy.trailOn(); 
 kreepy.move(); 
 Save the program, then compile and run it. Is the output what you expected it to be?   
 Add the following instruction to your program before kreepy moves for the first time to change 
the trail to blue: 
 kreepy.setColor (Color.blue); 
 Save, compile and run. You will get an error message. 
We need to get access to the Color class (American spelling). To do so we need to tell Java to import 
the package which contains the Color class, just like we imported the it package.  
 Add a statement above the class heading to import the Java package to which the Color 
class belongs, above (or below) the import it.*; statement (above the class heading): 
 import java.awt.*;  
 Save, compile and run.  
Your program should work correctly now, with the Gogga object being blue and drawing a blue trail. 
  
The "set..." methods are used to give 
values to the fields (variables in memory). 
The label field requires a text or String 
value, which is a set of characters in 
double quote marks. 
The text that is to be displayed for the 
label is enclosed in double quote marks 
inside round brackets. 
===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 12 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
1.6 Errors 
Learning to cope with errors is part of programming. When you first run a program that you have 
created it will probably have errors. Luckily an error message and the location of the errors are 
pointed out and most errors are usually easy to fix. It is useful to get to know what different error 
messages mean. 
ACTIVITY 8 
Error messages.  
 Open the MakeSquare program if you do not still have it on your screen. 
 In the first line bug.move (); remove the semi-colon from the end of the line   
bug.move () 
 Compile the program (or run the program). 
Your program editor should show you where the error has occurred by drawing your attention to the 
line bug.move() with the missing semi-colon. It may show you the error on the following line, as it 
has looked for the semi colon along the previous line and now it is still expecting a semi colon before 
the beginning of the next line. 
The error messages may not seem very helpful now, but should make more sense as you understand 
more about programming, so you should try to understand them. 
 Do not put back the semi-colon. Use the Backspace or Delete key to remove the closing bracket 
at the end of the line of code 
bug.move ( 
 Compile or run the program.  
Note that if your editor expects you to compile your program before you run it, it will not run the 
program if it cannot compile successfully.  
 Look carefully at the position of the cursor/highlighted text and the description of the error in the 
error message. 
 Fix the above errors and check that your program compiles and runs. 
 Add code to give the bug the label "Thabo". Place this code before the first bug.move(); line 
and after Gogga bug = new Gogga();  The code to give the bug the label "Thabo" is: 
 bug.setLabel("Thabo"); 
 Compile and run the program.  
 Now remove the bracket, the semi colon and second inverted comma, so that the instruction is:  
 bug.setLabel("Thabo 
 Compile or run the program.  
The error message should describe that the second set of double quotes is missing. 
 Fix the above errors and now change move to be spelt incorrectly in the first bug.move(); line, 
as in bug.moove() 
 Fix the move() error and change bugg to be misspelt, as in bugg.move(); 
You should get a similar error to the one above, as the Java IDE program does not understand what 
bugg is. It knows that bug is an object from the statement Gogga bug = new Gogga (); A syntax 
error is generated since no bugg has been created. In the same way it does not know of a method 
moove(). 
===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 13 
All the above errors are known as syntax errors or compilation errors since they prevent the 
program from compiling successfully. A syntax error occurs because of a misspelling or incorrect or 
missing characters such as semi colons and brackets. It can also occur as a result of a command or 
word that has not been defined, so the Java IDE program does not understand it. 
EXERCISE 3 
The following Java program was coded to create a Gogga object which would draw the letter S as 
shown on the output grid. Unfortunately, when this program was run, it produced several errors. Your 
task is to correct the errors in this program. 
// The LetterS class. 
public class LetterS 
{ 
   public static void main (String[] args)  
   { 
      Gogga bug = new Gogga; 
      tick.setTrailWidth (12); 
      tick.setPosition (8, 22); 
      tick.setDirection (Gogga.LEFT); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.turnLeft (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.turnLeft (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.turnLeft (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
      tick.move (); 
   } // main method 
} // LetterS class 
 Start a new application in your Java IDE called LetterS and type in the program, exactly as 
given. 
 Add your name and today's date as a comment above the class heading. 
 Save it and run it. 
 There are at least three syntax errors preventing this program from compiling.  
 Add in or fix the statements needed to make the program compile. 
 When all the syntax errors have been corrected the program should compile and run.  
The Gogga grid appears but it may be empty!  There may be no Gogga object anywhere on it if you 
have not changed the statement: 
 tick.setPosition (8, 22);   
 Change this statement so that the Gogga does appear at the correct starting place on the grid. 
When the error above has been corrected the Gogga object appears and, if you have not yet changed 
other statements, it draws a square instead of the letter S as shown!   
 Change and/or add statements so that when the program is run, the Gogga object draws the 
letter S in the correct position on the grid, as shown. 

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 14 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
 Save the corrected program. 
The errors in this exercise that are not syntax errors are called logical errors. They are errors the 
programmer has made in the logical steps of the solution and they produce incorrect output. Logical 
errors do not prevent a program from compiling; the program runs but produces unexpected or 
illogical output. 
CHECK POINT 2 
Read the details carefully on the SUMMARY page that follows, then answer the following questions 
about the program on that page: 
1. What is the name of the class? 
2. What are the 2 sets of curly brackets for in the program?  In particular, 
2.1. the Outer Set and 
2.2. the Inner Set: 
3. Write down the name of the default constructor method used to create a Gogga object. 
4. How do you know if a method is a constructor? 
5. Write down the name of the Gogga object created in the program.  
6. Why does the program have a main method? 
7. What is the purpose of the statement import java.awt.*;  
8. Why is this statement put above the class heading? 
9. Name four different methods of the Gogga class used in the program. 
10. TRUE or FALSE?  
10.1. The Gogga object, louse, can only be used with methods of the Gogga class. 
11. Write down the Java statement to make louse face LEFT. 
12. Does it make a difference where the setColor() method is put in a program?  Explain. 
13. Roughly draw a simplified Gogga grid and show the output that will be produced by the above 
program when it is run. 
14. TRUE or FALSE 
14.1. A comment is a statement that displays what the program does when it is running. 
14.2. Not all method calls need to include round () brackets. 
14.3. A Gogga object can only be given names of insects. 
14.4. The default size of the Gogga grid is 15 columns across and 10 rows down. 
14.5. All Java programs that can be run must contain a main method. 
15. Write down the Java statements that you should add to the ColouredLines program to draw 
another line, in yellow, parallel to the other 2 lines and 2 lines further down the grid: 
16. Type in the code for the ColouredLines program and add your statements from 3. 
17. Add statements to make the Gogga object draw lines of 10 units instead of 2 units. Save your 
program. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 15 
Answer the following more general questions: 
18. Write down Java statements to:  
18.1. create a Gogga object called jo  
18.2. set its position at the top right-hand corner of the grid 
18.3. set its direction facing DOWN  
18.4. make it move 3 units 
18.5. Write down two methods of the Gogga class that begin with set… For each of the 
methods that you wrote down, explain the method's effect on the values of a Gogga 
object. 
19. Write a line of code to give the Gogga object named parktownPrawn a label with the name 
'Parky'. 
20. What punctuation marks do you need to place around the name in brackets? 
21. What line do you need to include at the top of the program above the class heading in order to 
execute the method setColor()? 
22. Give one example of a syntax error and explain how to fix it. 
23. Name another type of error that can occur when a program is run and give an example of this 
type of error. 
 
 
 
===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 16 
1.7 Summary of a Java Program using the Gogga Class 
 
 
 
 
// The ColouredLines class. 
// Your name & today's date 
import it.*; 
import java.awt.*; 
  
public class ColouredLines 
{ 
    public static void main (String[] args) 
    { 
        Gogga louse = new Gogga (); 
        louse.setPosition (2, 1); 
        louse.setDirection (Gogga.RIGHT); 
        louse.setColor (Color.black); 
        louse.move ();    
  
    louse.move (); 
 
        louse.setPosition (2, 3); 
        louse.setDirection (Gogga.RIGHT); 
       louse.setColor (Color.blue); 
       louse.move (); 
  louse.move (); 
 
    } //end of main method 
} // end of ColouredLines class 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The import it.*; statement  means that all 
the classes relating to a Gogga object are 
made available to be used in this program. 
A single line comment in Java 
starts with //. Comments are 
ignored when the program is run. 
The main() method is the 
starting point from which a Java 
program is run. 
 
The main() method contains 
the program instructions that are 
carried out when the program is 
run. These instructions or 
commands must be inside the 
main method's opening and 
closing curly brackets. 
Methods in Java always have 
round brackets ()after their 
names to identify that they are 
methods. Some methods have 
values in the brackets, some do 
not. 
 
The values in brackets are called 
parameters. It is important to 
call a method with the correct 
number of parameters.  
The methods used in this 
program are dependent on the 
object, louse, as they affect the 
object's properties. 
The statement import java.awt.*; 
means that the Gogga objects in this program 
can use colours from the Color class. 
This statement creates a Gogga object using 
the new operator and the Gogga() 
constructor method. 
The setPosition() method requires 2 values 
in brackets (parameters). The first value 
gives the column across and the second value 
gives the  row down. 
The setDirection() method needs a direction 
value, which is either UP, DOWN, LEFT or 
RIGHT. The direction must be prefixed with 
the class name Gogga. 
The setColor() method needs a Color value, 
which must be prefixed with the class name 
Color. 
Some fields and methods are independent of 
any objects. These are class fields or 
methods and they are used with the name of 
their class (using dot notation) instead of 
being used with a specific object. For 
example, Color.black is a fixed colour value 
which can be applied to any object; and so is 
the direction RIGHT which is a class value of 
the Gogga class. 
Only one object, louse, has been created in this program and this 
object is used with several different methods, such as move(), 
setPosition() and so on. 
 
The object and the methods used with it have to be from the 
same class. 
===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 17 
1.8 What Happens when a Program is Run? 
The Java IDE enables you to type in code for a Java program and provides options to compile and 
run your program. The IDE possibly highlights certain Java words and comments in a different colour 
or in bold. Some IDEs even provide functions that will help you find errors in your code while it is 
running.  
When you have a program such as MakeSquare.java (called the source code) open in your IDE, 
and you select the Compile or the Run the following takes place: 
1. The Java statements in the program MakeSquare.java are first checked for syntax errors. A 
program cannot be compiled if it contains syntax errors. If any errors are found, error messages 
are displayed. When no more errors are found, then step 2 is performed. 
2. The Java program is translated into a program in Java bytecode format (close to computer 
machine code) and this new file is saved with the same name as the Java program but with the 
extension class: MakeSquare.class. A message is displayed saying "Successful compilation" 
or something similar. 
3. On successful compilation, the bytecode program can be run or executed by running the 
program. The .class bytecode file is interpreted by the Java Virtual Machine into a format that 
can be run using the operating system (OSX, Linux or Windows) of the computer on which the 
program is saved.  
 
https://www.quora.com/As-Java-is-said-to-be-platform-independent-then-why-can%E2%80%99t-we-run-it-directly-on-Android-
devices 
4. during execution (running) of the program, which occurs from the first statement in the main 
method onwards, the output is displayed when the relevant statements are carried out. 
Note that some Java IDE's compile and then run a program with one action; others require that you 
first compile a program and then run in two separate steps. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 18 Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming 
1.9 Changing the Size of the Gogga Grid 
The default size of the Gogga grid is 15 blocks across and 10 down. It can be made larger with the 
code: 
 Gogga.setGridSize (numAcross, numDown); 
For example, Gogga.setGridSize (25, 20); will produce a grid with columns 0 to 24 and rows 
0 to 19. 
The setGridSize() method is a class method, so it is used with the class name Gogga, not with an 
object of the class. 
ACTIVITY 9  
Using a larger grid. 
 Start a new Java Application (program). Name the class Cross.  
 In the first line of the main method, add the statement Gogga.setGridSize (20, 10); 
 Add a statement to instantiate a Gogga object called fred after the statement above as follows: 
Gogga.setGridSize (20, 10); 
Gogga fred = new Gogga (); 
 Save and run. 
Setting the grid size uses the Gogga class name Gogga.setGridSize() and not a Gogga object.  
This is because the grid is independent of any Gogga objects that will be on it and it must be set up 
before any Gogga objects are created, so that it exists for objects to be placed on.  
The maximum grid size that can be set is (31, 19). This may vary depending on your screen. 
EXERCISE 4 
Code a program called HeartBeat that will draw a 
picture that looks like a person's heartbeat on a 
monitor.  
Your output should be the same as that shown in the 
screen shot here. Set the grid size as shown.  
Plan your program solution first by writing an algorithm.  
 
 
 
  

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 1 Introduction to Java Programming Page 19 
CHECK POINT 3 
1. What is an IDE and why is it used? 
2. Write down the steps that take place when a Java program is compiled. 
3. What is the name of the method that is used to change the size of the Gogga grid? 
4. Write down the line of code to make the grid 11 columns across and 6 rows down. 
5. Why must the size of the grid be changed before any objects are created? 
6. What is the maximum size of the grid? 
 