
===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 103 
Learning Unit 6 More About 
Objects 
6.1 Declaring and Instantiating Objects 
You know that a Gogga object is created using the statement Gogga bug = new Gogga(); The 
method Gogga() has the same name as the class: Gogga. This is a special method called a 
constructor. The purpose of this method is to assign values to the object's fields when an object is 
created. This Gogga () constructor has no parameter values in the brackets after its name so it will 
assign the default values to the fields of the new object.  
Before an object can have values assigned to its fields, it needs to exist!  The reserved word new is 
used with the constructor to create a new object which must be given an identifying name, such as 
bug:  
    Gogga    bug    =    new    Gogga();   
 
 
The object, bug, will be of type Gogga. The constructor Gogga() will allocate to the new object the 
fields defined in the class and allow it to use the available methods in the class.  
An object can also be said to be an instance of a class.  When an object is created, we say it is 
instantiated. The code to declare and instantiate a Gogga object can be done in two lines instead of 
one: 
 Gogga bug; 
 bug = new Gogga (); 
Instead of declaring and instantiating the code in two separate lines the code is often written as one 
line (which does exactly the same as the two separate lines): 
 Gogga bug = new Gogga (); 
The constructor for the Gogga class will give default values to the object bug which place it 
approximately in the middle of the screen, by assigning xPos = 7 and yPos = 5. The direction will be 
set to 1 for UP and the colour will be set to Color.red. The trailWidth will be set to 5, the showTrail 
field will be set to true, meaning that the object will draw a line as it moves. The label will be set to "" 
(empty String), meaning that it has no label. 
 int xPos = 7 
 int yPos = 5 
 int direction = 1 (UP) 
 Color = Color.red 
 int trailWidth = 5 
 boolean showTrail = true 
 String label =  "" 
Once methods are applied to the object bug, the values in these fields will change.  
  
Class to 
which object 
belongs Variable 
Operator used 
to create the 
object 
Constructor 
method 
===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 104 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
6.2 What Happens in Memory when a Gogga Object is 
Instantiated? 
When the statement Gogga bug; is executed, a space in memory is made and it is labelled bug. 
bug 
  
 
When the code bug = new Gogga(); is executed the bug variable stores the address of another 
location in memory which stores the object with all the fields' default values. 
bug 
  
    
Object bug 
xPos 7 
yPos 5 
direction 1 
color Color.red 
trailWidth 5 
showTrail true 
label "" 
6.3 A Program with More than One Gogga Object 
Many different objects can be created from the Gogga class. Just as a dress pattern can be used to 
create many dresses, a class can be used to create many objects.  
In a program the new operator and the Gogga() constructor method can be used to create more than 
one Gogga object. Each of these objects is independent of any other but has the same structure in 
terms of their fields and the methods they can use. Each Gogga object will have its own x and y 
position, direction, color, trail width etc. The values in these fields can be different for each object and 
these values will change as the objects use methods such as move() or setColor(). 
If you have two Gogga objects kreepy and bug, then the statement bug.move() will only change the 
values of the bug object. 
ACTIVITY 1 
 Start a new Application Template called TwoGoggas. 
 Import the it package at the top of the program. 
 Add instructions in the main method to  
• declare and instantiate one Gogga object called bug1 
• declare and instantiate another Gogga object called bug2 
• make bug1 have the colour cyan and bug2 have the colour magenta 
• make bug1 and bug2 face in opposite directions 
• make bug1 and bug2 both move forward three units. 
null 
AddrX 
The bug variable contains a value that is the 
address in memory of the Gogga object. 
===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 105 
 Save and run the program and check that the two Gogga objects do what is intended. 
 Write down the x and y value that stores the position on the grid of bug1 
 Write down the x and y value that stores the position on the grid of bug2 
 Write down as many other characteristics (field values) of bug1 and bug2 as you can. 
6.4 Other Gogga Constructors 
Once an object has been declared and then instantiated / created (with the new operator), a 
constructor of the class is called to assign values to the fields of this newly created object.  
Most classes from which objects are created have several different constructors allowing the 
programmer the freedom to choose the most appropriate starting values for the fields when creating 
an object.  
When we use the constructor Gogga() the default values are automatically assigned to the new 
object. But what if we want to make a Gogga object that starts out as blue, or one that starts in the top 
left-hand corner of the screen in position 1,1, without explicitly having to change the object's state 
using methods. At the moment, we would have to write three lines of code to achieve this. 
 Gogga flea = new Gogga (); 
 flea.setColor(Color.blue); 
 flea.setPosition (1,1); 
There are several different constructors in the Gogga class that can be used to create Gogga objects 
with different initial states which will allow us to change the default values given by the default 
constructor. 
6.4.1 Using the Gogga Documentation to find out about Gogga 
Constructors 
ACTIVITY 2 
 Copy and extract the IT Docs file available at www.funworks.co.za in the Java files section.  
 Open the index.html file and then open documentation for the Gogga class using the hyperlink. 
This is in the same format used by the Java Application Programming Interface (API) 
documentation supplied with (or in addition to) the Java SDK. This API documentation for Java (which 
you also have access to whenever you use the Help with Java Class Libraries) gives information on 
all Java packages, classes and methods. 
 Open this Gogga.html file in a Web Browser. 
The Gogga.html file gives details about all the components of the Gogga class.  
 Scroll down until you get to the Constructor Summary which gives details of all the available 
constructor methods. 
  How many constructors are listed there? 
 Write down the method signatures of all the constructors. A method signature is the method 
name followed by the list of parameters. 
 Start a new Application called ManyGoggas and type in the following code in the main method 
to create four Goggas, each using a different constructor. Leave the screen the default size. 
 Gogga one = new Gogga ();  
    Gogga two = new Gogga (8, 2); 
    Gogga three = new Gogga (Color.yellow); 
    Gogga four = new Gogga (2, 7, Color.blue); 
The word blue in Color.blue, can be written in lowercase or in capitals. 
===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 106 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
 Save and run this application. 
 Write down the number of Goggas that you can see displayed on the screen. 
 Can you explain this? 
 What colour is the Gogga called two and why? 
 Add the following code after the constructors and run the program: 
one.setLabel("1"); 
two.setLabel("2"); 
three.setLabel("3"); 
four.setLabel("4"); 
three.move(); 
three.move();  
 Now add  Gogga five = new Gogga (2, 7, Gogga.RIGHT, Color.blue); 
 Save and run. How many Goggas are visible? 
 Does it make any difference where you add the Gogga object called five constructor in the 
program? Explain your answer. 
6.4.2 Method Overloading 
In early examples, you created Gogga objects using the default constructor. Now you have five 
different Gogga constructors that can be used to create a Gogga object. The last four constructors 
create Goggas with starting values that are different from the default and from each other. 
Gogga()     //using default values 
Gogga (int across, int down)  //to set the starting position of  
       //the Gogga object 
Gogga (Color col)    // to set the colour of the Gogga 
Gogga (int across, int down, Color col)  
        //to set the starting position  
        //and the colour 
Gogga (int across, int down, int direction, Color col)  
        // to set the starting position  
        //and direction and colour 
The fact that there can be more than one method with the same name, but different parameters is 
called method overloading.   
How does Java know which method to use?   It is really quite simple. The method whose signature 
matches the statement used in a program will be used. So Gogga(4,3) will invoke the second 
constructor above.  
The process whereby Java searches for the correct method to match the call statement is called 
method resolution. There cannot be two methods with the same signature in the same class. That 
is, methods with the same name must have different parameter lists so that Java knows by looking at 
the parameters, which method to use when it is called. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 107 
EXERCISE 1 
1. Rewrite each section of code below as a single statement by using constructor methods. 
1.1.    
Gogga pam = new Gogga (); 
pam.setPosition (3,5); 
pam.setColor(Color.green); 
1.2.     
Gogga sipho = new Gogga (); 
sipho.setColor(Color.blue); 
sipho.setDirection(2); 
sipho.setPosition(1,1); 
2. Code a Java application called TwoBugs and add code:  
• using the most appropriate constructors, to create 2 Gogga objects, bug1 and bug2, with 
• bug1 being green and starting at position (7, 9), facing up 
• bug2 being red and starting at position (7, 0) and facing downwards. 
• to make bug1 and bug2 move forward alternately until their feelers are touching. 
2.1. Save and run. Ensure you complete this exercise, since you will need this program later 
on.  
3. Pyramid (use Color.blue) 
3.1. Code a Java application to produce the shape below. Think about the solutions before you 
start coding and use an algorithm to plan your solution. You can use one or more Gogga 
objects depending on how you approach the solution. You should try to minimise the 
amount of code used to draw the output.  
3.2. Decompose the problem into tasks such as the steps going up, the steps going down and 
the horizontal line. 
3.3. Identify the repetition in each task. 
3.4. Use for loops to draw the steps and a for loop to draw the base line of the pyramid. 
 
 

===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 108 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
CHECK POINT 1 
1. What is the purpose of a constructor method in a Java class? 
2. Explain the words instance and instantiated in terms of an object. 
3.     
3.1. Write code to declare and instantiate a Gogga object flea in two lines. 
3.2. Rewrite the code in 3.1 to do the same in one line. 
4. What does the reserved word new do? 
5. What are the default values of a Gogga object that is instantiated with the default constructor 
Gogga ()? 
6. Can you have more than one Gogga object in a program? 
7.     
7.1. Give an example of a Gogga constructor that is NOT the default constructor. 
7.2. Why is it useful to have a variety of constructor methods? 
7.3. Which code will execute faster, 7.3.1 or 7.3.2? 
7.3.1. Gogga sam = new Gogga ();  
sam.setPosition (5,10); 
sam.setColor(Color.blue); 
7.3.2. Gogga sam = new Gogga (5,10,Color.blue); 
7.4. Write a program to check your answer in 7.3. 
8. Explain the terms: method signature, method overloading and method resolution. 
9.     
9.1. Use the Gogga.html file to look up all the possible colours that are available for Gogga 
trails. Were you able to find them? 
9.2. The available colours are listed in the Color class. Use the Java APIs to look up the Color 
class. You will find a list of colours listed in the field summary. You will also notice that 
each colour has been listed twice, once in capitals and once in lowercase letters.  
9.3. By convention, typing the colours in capitals is more correct. All constants in Java, like the 
Gogga directions UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, should be in capitals. 
 
6.5 State Diagram 
The current values in an object's fields can be called the state of the object and these can be shown 
using a state diagram. The state diagram is a tracing tool (similar to trace tables) used to show the 
current values in the fields of an object at any given point in a program.  
The state diagram of a newly created Gogga object called bug facing UP before and after 
bug.move() was executed would be: 
  
===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 109 
 
Object bug  Object bug 
xPos 7  xPos 7 
yPos 5 After executing bug.move()-> yPos 4 
direction 1(UP)  direction 1(UP) 
color Color.red  color Color.red 
trailWidth 5  trailWidth 5 
showTrail true  showTrail true 
label ""  label "" 
EXERCISE 2 
1. Start a new Application Template called SetValues and import it.*; at the top. Add your name 
and the date as a comment. 
1.1. Add code in the main method to do the following, using the "set ... " methods of the Gogga 
class.  
begin 
create a new Gogga object called sam  
place sam at starting position x = 3 and y = 7   
make sam face RIGHT 
give sam the colour green (add import java.awt.*; above the class name) 
make the trail width 8 
set the label to be "sam" 
make sam move forward once    
end 
1.2. Save and run. Check that the attributes of the Gogga on your screen appear correct. 
1.3. Draw a state diagram with four columns to show the values of object sam. Write down the 
names of the fields in the first column. In the second column write down the values of the 
sam object after 1.1 has executed. 
1.4. Add code after the above statements to make the object called sam do the following: 
begin 
change the colour to black 
make it move forward once     
change the colour to yellow  
make it move forward once 
end 
1.5. Save and run and check that your new code works correctly. 
1.6. In the third column of the state diagram, write down the values of sam after 1.2 has 
executed. 
1.7. Add code after the above statements to make the Gogga object sam do the following: 
===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 110 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
begin 
change its colour to gray 
change its label to be your name (do not change the object or create another 
one) 
move to the position x = 2 and y = 1, drawing a trail from its previous position 
finish facing DOWN 
end 
1.8. Save and run and check that your new code works correctly. 
1.9. In the fourth column of the state diagram, write down the values of sam after 1.3 has 
executed. 
2. Complete the two state diagrams to show the final positions of bug1 and bug2 after the 
TwoBugs program has finished executing. 
Object bug1  Object bug2 
xPos   xPos  
yPos   yPos  
direction   direction  
color   color  
trailWidth   trailWidth  
showTrail   showTrail  
label   label  
3. Start a new application and use class name FourBugs. Add statements to import it.*; and the 
package that enables you to use the Color class in your program.  Add your name and the date 
as a comment. 
3.1. Add code in the main method to do the following, using the "set ... " methods of the Gogga 
class.  
begin 
create a blue Gogga object named bug1 at position 2,7 and is facing right 
create a grey Gogga object named bug2 at position 2, 3 and is facing down 
create a green Gogga object named bug3 at position 7, 2 and is facing left 
create a yellow Gogga object named bug4 at position 7, 8 and is facing up 
end 
3.2. Add statements to make each bug move 4 units in the direction in which it is facing. 
3.3. Save and run and check that your program works correctly. 
 
6.6 Investigating the Color Class 
The Java Application Programmer's Interface (API) available at https://docs.oracle.com/javase  
consists all the classes that are a standard part of Java. It seems difficult to use at first, but it is worth 
persevering, as it can be very helpful, and you can use it in exams. 
===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 111 
ACTIVITY 3 
 To browse the classes in the API, go to the https://docs.oracle.com/javase address using 
your Internet browser. 
 Scroll down on the left-hand side to find the Color class and click on the Color class. The Color 
class API will appear in the window on the right.  
 Scroll down until you find the Field Summary section. Find the field GREEN or green. As an 
exception, the colors can be in CAPITALS or lowercase.  
 
 Click on the colour GREEN and notice that the field is declared as final which means the color 
value is constant and cannot be changed. This makes sense as the colour of green should not 
change! 
 Display the value of the colour in the screen by using the System.out.println() method. 
 List all the colours that are available in the Color class.  
These colours can be used for any Gogga object. 
 Remain in the Color class and scroll down past the field summary. The next section is the 
Constructor Summary. There are many constructors listed here to create new Color objects. 
  Find the constructor that accepts three integers as parameters and click on it to see its 
details. 
 
 
Note that it is only declared as public. This means that the method is available outside of the class 
and we can use it. It would be silly if a constructor was not made public!   

===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 112 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
Refer to section 1.7.2 in Learning Unit 1 of Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 about how colour is s 
represented using RGB. 
6.6.1 Creating your Own Colours 
In a similar way to creating object variables of the Gogga class you can create object variables of the 
Color class to store new colours to use in programs. 
ACTIVITY 4 
Load the TwoBugs program that you created earlier. 
Just before the statement to create bug1, add the following statement to create a new Color variable, 
col1: 
 Color col1 = new Color( 120, 200, 80 ); 
One constructor method of the Color class requires three parameters, each in the range 0 to 255, 
specifying the amount of red, green and blue used in the colour being created. 
 Add a statement to import the package to use the Color class. 
 Change the parameters in the constructor method for bug1, so that the line to create bug1 
becomes: 
 Gogga bug1 = new Gogga (7, 9, col1); 
 When you use a built-in colour such as blue, you must type Color.blue but when you create a 
Color variable, you just use the variable identifier. 
 Remember to add the statement at the very top of your program to import the necessary 
package when using the Color class. 
 Save and run the program. What colour is bug1? 
 Add a line of code to create a new colour col2 with a red value of 67, a green value of 134 and 
a blue value of 188. 
 Change the parameter in bug2's constructor method to use col2 instead of Color.red 
 Save and run the program. 
 Add code to create a new colour col3 after bug1 has moved 2 units. Choose any values for red, 
green and blue as long as they lie between 0 and 255 (inclusive). You must not use the 
constructor to change the colour as the object already exists and you would get a duplication 
error. Use the setColor() method to change the colour.  
Your code should be: 
Color col3 = new Color( ..., ..., ... ); 
bug1.setColor (col3); 
 Save and run your program to check that it works.  
You could have reused the variable col1 instead of creating a new object col3. 
col1 = new Color( ..., ..., ... ); 
bug1.setColor (col1); 
Note that you don't have to re-declare col1. In fact, you will get an error if you do. You could have 
used col1 to create all the colours in the program. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 113 
Let's examine the four objects, bug1, bug2, col1 and col2. They can be represented in memory as 
follows: 
bug1     bug2 
 
AddrX   AddrY  
xPos 7  xPos 7 
yPos 9  yPos 0 
direction 1  direction 2 
color col1  color col2 
trailWidth 5  trailWidth 5 
showTrail true  showTrail true 
label ""  label "" 
 
col1     col2 
 
AddrA   AddrB  
red 120  red 167 
green 200  green 134 
blue 80  blue 188 
6.6.2 Investigating Colours 
ACTIVITY 5 
 Load an application such as Paint that allows you 
to mix colours given the red, green and blue 
values.  
 If you look at the Edit Colours dialog box from MS 
Paint, you can see that you can either choose a 
colour from the palette or you can enter in values 
for red, green and blue. 
If you click on the colour palette, the values for red, 
green and blue will appear. 
 
 Now change the TwoBugs class so that bug1 and bug2's initial colours are entered by the 
user. Allow the user to input the red, green and blue values (each in the range 0 to 255). 
Instantiate a Color object for each of the bugs and use that object when instantiating the bug 
objects. 
  
AddrX AddrY 
AddrA AddrB 

===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 114 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
6.7 Random Numbers 
The computer can generate random numbers in a specific range which can be useful in some 
problems, such as generating values between 0 and 255 (inclusive) for red, green and blue to mix a 
totally random colour.  
The built-in Math class has a random() method which produces a real number between 0 and 1 (but 
not including 1).  
The resulting value returned by random is not very useful, but we can multiply the fractional number 
by an integer (N) which will produce a random real number in the range 0 ≤ random number < N. This 
is converted to an integer using the cast (int). 
ACTIVITY 6 
 Type in the code below in a class called RandomTest. 
public class Random 
{ 
    
    public static void main (String[] args) 
    { 
      System.out.println(Math.random ()); 
    } 
} 
 Run the program three times and write down the answers which are displayed. 
 Now change the code to be System.out.println(Math.random()*10); 
 Run the program three times and write down what was produced. 
The code thus far produces a real number. 
 Change the code as shown below so that an integer is produced. 
System.out.println( (int) (Math.random ()*10) ); 
Make sure that you add in the extra brackets around (Math.random()*10) as this expression must be 
evaluated first before the real number is cast to an integer. 
 Save and run the program three times. 
 Write down the answers that are displayed.  
 Is the integer 10 ever displayed? 
6.7.1 Storing the Generated Random Number 
The random number that has been generated can be stored in a variable for later use.  
 Change the statement  
 System.out.println((int) (Math.random ()*10));  
to become the following two lines: 
 int randomNum = (int) (Math.random ()*10); 
 System.out.println(randomNum); 
The value generated in stored in a variable randomNum. The value is displayed on the screen. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 115 
6.7.2 How Does Random Work? 
Math.random(); 
The random() method of the Math class 
produces a number between 0 and 1. 
Let's say it generates 0.453. 
(Math.random() * 10); 
Brackets are essential to force the multiplication to be done first 
Multiply by 10:   0.453 * 10 = 4.53 
(int) (Math.random() * 10); 
(int) casts (converts) the real number 
4.53 to an integer by dropping the 
decimals, so it becomes 4 
randNum = (int) (Math.random() * 10); 
The result (4 in this example) is stored in 
the variable randNum 
System.out.println(randNum); 
System.out.println displays the value in 
the variable on the screen 
 
To produce one random integer between 0 and 9 (inclusive), use the code: 
  int randNum = (int) ( Math.random() * 10 );   
The variable randNum will contain one integer from the set { 0;1;2;3;4;5;6;7;8;9 }. 
 
To produce one random integer between 1 and 10 (inclusive), use the code: 
 int randNum = (int)( Math.random() * 10 ) + 1; 
The variable randNum will contain one integer from the set { 1;2;3;4;5;6;7;8;9;10 }. 
 
 Change the code to produce a number between 1 and 10.  
 Save and run the program a few times to check that it works. 
 Now change the code to produce a number between 0 and 5. 
 Save and run the program a few times to check that it works. 
 Change the code again to produce a number between 1 and 5. 
 Save and run the program a few times to check that it works. 
 
In general,  
 to produce one random integer between A and B (inclusive), use the code: 
  int randNum = (int) ( Math.random() * (B-A+1) ) + A; 
OR 
 int randNum = (int) ( Math.random() * (No of Options)) + Start Num; 
===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Page 116 Learning Unit 6 More About Objects 
EXERCISE 3 
1. Code a new Application called DiceThrow which simulates a throw of a dice by producing one 
random integer in the range {1;2;3;4;5;6}. Declare a variable, num, of type int, to store the 
random number generated. Display this integer on the Standard Input/Output screen using 
System.out.println() with a suitable message. 
1.1. Save your program and then run it several times. Check that you only get values in the 
specified range. 
2. Start a new Application called LongJumpGogga.  
2.1. Create two Gogga objects called sam and fred, as follows:  
2.2. Add code to instantiate the Gogga object called sam which has the colour black and is 
positioned at 1, 4 and faces right.  
2.3. Also instantiate a new Gogga object fred which is yellow and is positioned at 1, 7 and 
faces right.  
2.4. Now add code to generate an integer y-value between 1 and 5 for both sam and fred. 
Use each y-value to position sam and fred in column 1 and row y. This will make both 
Gogga objects appear in any of the first 5 rows on the grid before they jump horizontally.  
2.5. Generate a random integer in the range 1 to 10, which represents sam's new x-position. 
Now make sam jump to this new horizontal position while keeping the vertical position the 
same. 
2.6. Now do the same for fred. Generate a random integer, in the range 1 to 10, representing 
his new x-position and make fred jump to this new horizontal position while keeping the 
vertical position the same. 
2.7. Save and run your program at least three times, checking that it works correctly. 
 
6.8 Generating Random Colours 
You can create colours that are random by generating values for red, green and blue. These values 
can be stored in variables of type integer. 
ACTIVITY 7 
 Start a new class called RandCol and type in the following code in the class' main method: 
Gogga flea = new Gogga (); 
       
int red = (int) (Math.random ()*256); 
int green = (int) (Math.random ()*256); 
int blue = (int) (Math.random ()*256); 
 
Color newCol = new Color (red, green, blue);  
          
flea.setColor(newCol); 
flea.move (); 
flea.move (); 
flea.move (); 
 Add the necessary import statements above the class header. 
 Save and run the code a few times to see the different colours of flea's trail. 
===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
 Exploring IT: Java Programming Grade 10 
Learning Unit 6 More About Objects Page 117 
6.8.1 What is Stored in Memory at the End of the Program's 
Execution? 
Assuming that 134 was generated for red, 59 for green and 83 for blue 
   flea     newCol 
 
AddrX   AddrY  
xPos 7  red 134 
yPos 8  green 59 
direction 1  blue 83 
color newCol  red  
trailWidth 5  134  
showTrail true  green  
label ""  59  
   blue  
   83  
Note that the variables red, green and blue are stored as separate boxes in memory as they are not 
Objects but primitive data type (int) variables.   
 Add code to declare an integer variable trail that will have a random value between 1 and 10. 
Use this variable to change the width of the trail of the Gogga object.  
CHECK POINT 2 
1. What is a state diagram and why is it useful? 
2. What is the purpose of a Java API? 
3. What would you expect to find in the Field Summary of the Color class? 
4. Write down a constructor method of the Color class to create your own colours. 
5. Write down code to instantiate a new Color object called col with values of 0, 0, 0 for red, green 
and blue.  
6. Now instantiate a new Gogga object called buggy with the Color col. 
7. What colour will the above Gogga be? 
8. Write down the general formula to create a random number between a and b. 
9. Write down the code to assign a random number to num if the number is between: 
9.1. 10 and 25 incl 
9.2. 51 and 63 incl 
9.3. 143295 and 500000 incl 
 
AddrX AddrY 