
===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 20 Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer 
Learning Unit 2 Overview of a 
Computer 
2.1 Hardware and Software 
Hardware is the collection of physical components attached to or forming part of the computer 
system; those items that you can see and touch. Software is the collection of non-physical parts of 
the system; the operating system, application programs and the data. 
Together, the hardware and software interact to ensure that the computer can successfully receive 
input data, process the data, store the data and output information to a device or communicate it 
elsewhere. Neither could exist on their own – hardware needs software to tell it what to do and 
software needs hardware to perform its tasks. 
For example, a printer is not software, it needs working parts to perform the task of printing – there is 
no software that can simply create a printed document without having a machine to do it. Unless a 
printer receives an instruction to print and what to print, it will stand idle. 
2.1.1 The General Processing Cycle 
The diagram below shows the hardware in boxes and the software that travels along the arrows to 
perform the tasks initiated by the user: 
A computer is a device that performs tasks at high speed. The component that performs these tasks 
is the Central Processing Unit (CPU), commonly called the processor. The processor is fed 
instructions that are stored in Random Access Memory (RAM). Instructions are fed to the processor 
one at a time and each instruction is systematically processed.  
All data needs to be stored in RAM before it can be processed. RAM can receive data from input 
devices such as a keyboard or secondary storage such as a hard drive. The data in RAM is not 
stored permanently. It can be copied to secondary storage or sent to an output device such as a 
screen or printer. 

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer Page 21 
Note that the CPU cannot execute instructions in secondary storage, these instructions must first be 
loaded into RAM. Likewise, a screen only displays what is stored in RAM. 
2.1.2 Connectivity and an ICT System 
ICT is an abbreviation for Information and Communication Technology. With the advent of 
communication (networking), computers became able to 'talk' to one another and exchange data 
between them. The hardware model is extended to include communication devices: 
2.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Computers 
The following table shows some of the advantages and disadvantages of using computers: 
Area Advantages Disadvantages 
Professional • Fast access to data 
• Time-critical transactions can 
take place at high speed 
• Electrical failures cause much loss 
of productivity 
• Unauthorised access to data is 
possible 
Personal • Online shopping/banking 
• Mail services 
• Injuries related to poor working 
conditions 
• Scams and online fraud 
Environmental • Less use of paper 
• Less traveling, hence less 
pollution, if you can work from 
home 
• Toxic waste is generated by 
dumping of old equipment 
• Greater energy hence more 
electrical requirements 
Upgrading Your computer is up to date and you 
can keep abreast of rapidly changing 
technology. The Internet facilitates 
efficient updating of software 
Hardware quickly becomes outdated; 
software constantly needs to be 
upgraded with versions constantly 
changing. As the software develops so 
your hardware becomes obsolete 
 

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 22 Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer 
2.3 Data and Information 
Data is raw unorganised facts that need to be processed to make it useful and meaningful. 
Information is processed data - organised, structured or presented in a given context to make it 
useful. For example, if we have a spreadsheet that contains the names and ages of people (data), we 
can use the processing capabilities of the application to create graphs, summaries and calculations 
(information). The numbers or values in the spreadsheet are input as data, processed and the result 
is output as information. 
 
2.4 Computer System Types 
The current categories of computers are briefly tabulated below: 
*Processing Power, indicated below, is a combination of speed, number of cores (processors) and 
number of instructions processed per second. These concepts are dealt with later - for now we will 
summarize using a scale of 1 (lowest) to 10 (highest): 
Name Description Primary Use *Processing 
Power 
Size Portability 
Desktop Also called Personal 
Computers; the most common 
type of computer currently in 
use. Processor circuitry is 
contained in one chip called 
the microprocessor, or more 
commonly, the CPU. 
Running 
applications that 
need a lot of 
memory, speed 
and/or graphics 
capabilities. 
3 – 4 Large – 
occupies an 
entire desktop. 
Not portable at 
all. 
Laptop Laptops or Notebooks are 
similar to desktop computers 
but are more mobile. Price 
and performance have 
become quite comparable to 
desktop computers with the 
introduction of 
microprocessors specially 
made for mobile computers. 
Similar to desktop 
computers, but 
high graphics 
capabilities are 
limited because of 
the screen size. 
3 – 4 Much smaller 
than a desktop 
computer. All 
essential 
peripherals are 
integrated in the 
casing. 
Very portable. 
Tablet A lightweight, low-powered, 
laptop-shaped mobile 
computer, with a touch screen 
or graphics tablet screen. You 
can write directly on the 
screen and convert to digital 
text. A keyboard and/or 
mouse can be attached but 
isn't necessary with the touch 
screen. 
Good for 
demonstration 
applications and 
those where a 
stylus or digital pen 
is used for 
emphasis and 
explanation. 
1 - 2 Can occupy the 
same area as a 
Laptop but is 
much thinner as 
there is no 
keyboard and 
mouse. 
Very portable. 

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer Page 23 
Name Description Primary Use *Processing 
Power 
Size Portability 
Smartphone A smartphone is a mobile 
phone that offers more 
advanced computing ability 
and connectivity than a 
conventional phone. 
Smartphones usually allow 
users to install and run 
advanced applications. 
Mostly to allow for 
connectivity, mail 
access and 
running 
applications such 
as GPS, and 
telephony.  
1 - 2 Same as a 
regular phone; 
some are 
slightly wider to 
offer a bigger 
screen area. 
Very portable. 
Smart wear These are wearable devices 
(e.g. watches) that contain a 
simpler smartphone operating 
system capable of 
connectivity and smart apps.  
Information, such 
as directions, 
fitness statistics. 
Pairing with a 
smartphone allows 
the smartphone 
apps/hardware to 
be used on the 
device (e.g. a 
camera). 
1 Very small, the 
size of a 
wristwatch. 
Very portable. 
Server Server computers are usually 
powerful computers with large 
storage capacity, to which 
other computers in a network 
connect, to use the server's 
resources. The servers 
provide services to the 
machines in the network. 
Types of server include file 
servers, print servers and web 
servers. 
Centralised 
processing and/or 
specific 
management 
capabilities (e.g. 
Application, Web, 
Antivirus, Mail and 
data). 
5 – 8  Dual and 
quad core 
processors can 
work 
independently 
or together to 
increase 
efficiency and 
performance. 
Similar to a 
desktop 
computer. 
Servers that can 
contain multiple 
hard disks will 
naturally be 
somewhat 
larger. 
Not portable at 
all. 
Embedded 
Computer 
A computer system designed 
to perform one or more 
dedicated functions. It is 
embedded as part of a 
device, often including 
hardware and mechanical 
parts. Embedded systems 
control many devices in 
common use today. For 
example, computer systems 
in cars and household 
appliances. 
Not used as a 
typical computer – 
rather to provide 
limited and specific 
processing 
capabilities to 
appliances and 
electronic 
equipment. 
N/A N/A N/A 
Single 
Board 
Computer 
For example, Raspberry Pi 
and Arduino. It consists of a 
small motherboard with a 
processor and storage. It 
includes ports for input 
devices and output devices. 
Mainly used to 
code in Scratch 
and/or Python and 
can be used to 
create smart 
devices. Arduino is 
very good for 
writing code to 
control robotic 
devices.  
1 Extremely small 
– can be as 
small as a credit 
card. 
Very portable. 
Super 
Computer 
This is the largest type of 
computer, used in 
computational science, 
quantum mechanics, weather 
forecasting and a host of 
other high-level computing 
environments. 
Most use Linux as 
an operating 
system to 
manipulate very 
large databases. 
10 Extremely large; 
often taking up 
multiple floors of 
office buildings. 
Not at all. 
===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 24 Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer 
2.5 Operating Systems (OS) 
Every computer needs to have an operating system installed and 
running on it. An operating system is a collection of many programs that 
manages the hardware and allows the user to run software applications 
like word processors or Internet browsers. Most operating systems have 
a kernel which the smallest part of the operating system that is always 
stored in memory. The kernel is loaded when the computer is turned on. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_system 
Computers and devices must have an o perating system  to run which 
varies depending on the type of device. 
2.5.1 Desktop Operating System 
Desktop operating systems support hardware functions such as input, 
processing and output and acts as interface between application programs and the computer 
hardware. Most desktop computers and laptops use versions of Mac OS or Windows, with some 
using versions of Linux (e.g. Ubuntu).  
2.5.2 Mobile Operating System 
Mobile operating systems are specifically designed to run on mobile devices such as mobile phones, 
smart phones, tablets and other handheld devices. They differ from desktop operating systems in that 
they are designed to use the limited resources of the mobile device more efficiently. Many tablets and 
smartphones use Android as their operating system. Versions evolve quite rapidly, with 'Kitkat' and 
'Lollipop' moving to 'Nougat' and 'Oreo'. The Apple family of tablets and smartphones (iPhone/iPad) 
use versions of the iOS operating system.  
2.5.3 Embedded Operating System 
An embedded system is a part of another machine. Many different embedded systems exist, including 
those for robots, cars, washing machines, traffic lights, televisions, ATMs and many more. An 
embedded operating system is a specialised OS for use in the computers built into larger systems 
and is typically more compact than a desktop OS. They are often designed for real-time operations 
where data is processed immediately without any delays. There's a wide variety of manufacturers of 
embedded operating systems, including Linux (the 'parent' of Android) and iOS. 
2.6 Application Software 
Application software carries out tasks for computer users, such as allowing them to create documents 
or play games or update a database. The simplest way to determine if the software is Application 
Software is to ask the question “Will the computer run without this software?”  If the answer is YES, 
then the software is application software. 
2.6.1 Stand-Alone or Desktop Applications 
A stand-alone or desktop application runs on a computer without any need to interact with any other 
software. The application uses the hardware and operating system of the computer to perform its 
functions. In the following image, Microsoft Word is used as an example. The operating system, 
Microsoft Word and Word documents are all permanently stored on secondary storage, shown in the 
lower block. When the computer is turned on, the operating system is loaded into RAM (the centre 
block). When the user loads Microsoft Word, a copy of Word is placed into RAM which is in turn 
processed by the CPU. 

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer Page 25 
 
https://slideplayer.com/slide/5219769/ 
2.6.2 Network Applications 
A network application is designed to run on multiple computers that are connected via a network, 
usually the Internet. The network is classified as a client-server network, where the server provides 
a service to the client computers. The server is considered to be a remote computer and can be on 
the local network or linked via the Internet.  
The client is the local computer. The client could be a desktop computer, laptop or a portable device 
like a smartphone or tablet. The storage of data is usually on the remote server and not on the local 
computer. 
 
https://slideplayer.com/slide/9261880/ 
RAM 
HARD DRIVE 
===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 26 Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer 
2.7 Data Transfer and Synchronising between Devices 
Synchronisation is a process where the data on your desktop and mobile device is consistent. Both 
devices see the latest version of the data. For example, your contacts, calendars and email should 
reflect the most recent data regardless of the device that was used to make the changes.  
Mobile devices need to have a way of loading apps, doing updates and updating their operating 
systems or settings. Mobile operating systems provide communication software to perform these 
functions. This communication is usually via a USB port, using a cable, docking unit or cradle; 
wireless connections using the Internet, wireless network or even slower 'Bluetooth'. 
You can use your computer to backup data from your mobile device, transfer data between the two 
and synchronise contacts, email and calendars. A calendar app like 'Google Calendar' synchronises 
data by updating the data on a shared location and both devices simply access the data. 
The data transfer can be a two-way process, i.e. the mobile device can update data on the computer 
(or any other device that it is connected to, e.g. a Tablet) and vice versa. The synchronization 
management application can determine if the data on each device is different and can provide options 
for which way to overwrite or not. 
CHECK POINT 1 
1. Define hardware and software and give an example of each. 
2. What is the difference between system software and application software? 
3. How does communication fit into the general model of computer design? 
4. Draw up an input, process, output, storage and communication diagram for each of the 
following scenarios: 
4.1. When you pay for a meal at a restaurant by credit card. 
4.2. When you withdraw money from an ATM. 
5. Which would you prefer, a desktop or laptop? Give TWO reasons for your answer. 
6. Describe an item of smart wear that you have seen or used.  
6.1. What can it do that makes it a useful device to have? 
7. Copy and complete the following table to list one operating system available for each device: 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Write down what is meant by 'synchronising' of devices? 
9. What data would you normally want to synchronise? 
10. List the advantages and disadvantages of Smartphones. 
11. Embedded operating systems are often used in 'robots' that replace humans to do labour.  
11.1. How does this affect unemployment? 
11.2. How does this affect job creation? 
11.3. What would you suggest someone should do if they perceive their job is threatened by 
new technologies? 
Device OS 
Desktop  
Smartphone  
Smart wear  
Embedded OS  
===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 2 Overview of a Computer Page 27 
12. In a network application, define the following terms: 
12.1. client 
12.2. server 
12.3. local 
12.4. remote 
 
 