
===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 85 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and 
WWW 
7.1 What is the Internet? 
The Internet is a worldwide collection of computer networks that 
can be connected for the purposes of sharing resources or 
communicating. The Internet can be seen as a Global network as 
it spans the whole world. 
When information is transferred using the Internet it usually 
travels through several interconnected networks. Basic services 
of the Internet include e-mail services and web sites. 
Communication on the Internet involves hosts, routers and 
links. A host is a sender or receiver computer, such as the 
workstation you are using, or a server. Hosts are connected to 
one another using communication links. These links are made 
up of transmission media that can be either bounded (wired) or 
unbounded (wireless). As we discussed in Learning Unit 5.7.1, 
Routers are sophisticated devices that are used to determine 
the path(s) along which data must travel to get from one host to 
another using a communication link. A router is usually used to 
connect an organisation's network to an ISP's network to enable Internet access.  
7.2 Basic Services on the Internet  
7.2.1 Cloud Storage 
Cloud storage is the storage of data online – “in the cloud”. Cloud storage companies offer file storage 
space for a fee.  
There are many benefits to using cloud storage:  
• you do not have to buy new equipment 
• you do not have to manage and maintain expensive storage devices 
• you can access the cloud storage at any time from any place and from any computer device as 
long as you are connected to the Internet 
• you have an automatic remote backup, and  
• you only pay for the storage space that you are using. 
There are many benefits to cloud storage but also some concerns:   
• an unreliable Internet connection can stop data access  
• security of your data is a concern as you have no control over the security of the cloud storage 
company other than to trust their contract 
• the company storing the data could close or have an irrecoverable disaster. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 86 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
7.2.2 Email 
Email is short for 'electronic mail'. Similar to a letter, an email is sent via the Internet to any recipient 
who has an email address. In order to send and receive emails different sets of rules or protocols are 
used. For example, SMTP is used to send messages, while the POP or IMAP protocols are used to 
retrieve messages from a mail server. When you set up an email account, you must set up an email 
address, password, and the mail servers used to send and receive messages. Fortunately, most 
webmail services configure your account automatically, so you only need to enter your email address 
and password.  
7.2.3 Web Sites  
A web site is a collection of linked web pages which may be accessed using an application called an 
Internet browser. Web sites are accessed by their domain name. Websites are usually created, 
uploaded and managed on the Internet by a person a company or organisation.  
7.3 IP Addresses 
In order for computers to communicate with one another, sets of rules called protocols are required. 
The most common protocols that are used by computers on the Internet are: 
• TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) 
• IP (Internet Protocol) 
In simple terms TCP is responsible for making sure that the transmission gets from the sender host to 
its destination host while IP identifies the different computers connected to the Internet. Collectively 
these protocols are called the TCP/IP suite. The advantages of these protocols are that they allow 
direct access to the Internet and they enable communication between computer systems that may be 
totally different. 
The path of a message sent from a sender to its destination involves a number of other hosts and 
routers along the way. The Internet uses an addressing system called the Domain Name System 
(DNS) to assign unique names and numbers to the hosts/computers that are connected. Each host 
connected to the Internet has a hostname (also called a domain name) as well as a unique IP 
address to identify it.  
A hostname is made up of words and is easy for humans to understand, whereas an IP address is a 
32-bit number or 128-bit number. This is difficult for humans to read. IPv4 addressing system uses 32 
bits divided into four 8-bit numbers (ranging 0 to 255) separated by dots. For example, the IP address 
1000 0011 0110 1011 0000 0010 1100 1000 is broken into four bytes: 
1000 0011         .         0110 1011         .         0000 0010         .         1100 1000 
Each byte is converted to its decimal equivalent. 
131                .              107              .                 2                 .               200 
The IP address is written with dots separating the decimal numbers. 131.107.2.200 
An example of a hostname and IP address that identify a host is: 
Hostname: funworks.co.za  IP Address: 41.185.16.10 
If you know the IP address of a destination computer, you can type it in instead of the URL in a web 
browser when connected to the Internet.  
The 32 bits used to represent each IPv4 address allows for 232 different addresses giving around 4.29 
billion addresses. That may seem like a lot, but all 4.29 billion IPv4 addresses have now been 
assigned to various institutions, leading to a shortage of addresses. For this reason, a new version 
===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 87 
IPv6 has been introduced. We will discuss IPv4 and IPv6 addressing systems in more detail in Grade 
11.  
ACTIVITY 1 
 Connect to the Internet and use a web browser to connect to the “How Stuff Works” web site 
using the URL: www.howstuffworks.com  
 Open a Command Prompt Window by clicking the Start button and typing cmd into the search 
programs and files text field. 
 At the prompt symbol (>) type: tracert www.howstuffworks.com  and press <Enter> 
 Count the number of “hops” from computer to computer required on the route from your 
computer to www.howstuffworks.com. 
 Notice that the IP address of the web site you traced is written in the last line of the list of hops.  
 Open your web browser and enter the above IP address in the URL address bar. Check that 
you are directed to the www.howstuffworks.com's web site. 
 Work out what the IP address will be in binary. 
To determine the IP address of the computer you are working on, use the Command Prompt and type 
in the command ipconfig. If this command is run on a computer, certain details about the Windows IP 
Configuration are shown. One of these details is the IP address of the host. 
ACTIVITY 2 
Find out the IP address of the computer you are working on. 
 If you are using Windows, open the Command prompt  
 Type: ipconfig and press <Enter> 
7.4 What is Needed to Connect to the Internet? 
There are many ways that a personal electronic device can connect to the Internet. Your device 
needs certain hardware and software depending on the type of connection that you are going to use. 
7.4.1 Hardware and Software  
A computer with a: 
• Network card or a wireless enabled computer 
• Software such as an Internet browser 
• A device such as a router/wireless router which would enable you to connect to either a 
physical line or a wireless access point  
A mobile device with a: 
• SIM Card for access to mobile data 
• Wi-Fi capabilities to enable the device to connect to a Wi-Fi access point which is in range of 
the device or a personal hotspot (the mobile device is tethered to second device to access the 
mobile data available to the second device) 
• A browser software app installed on the device. For example, Apple devices use an app called 
Safari while Android devices use a Google Browser app. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 88 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
7.4.2 Types of Connections 
As technology has changed, faster Internet connections have changed or improved to handle those 
changes. The following type of connections are available to connect large networks or personal 
devices to the Internet. 
7.4.2.1 ADSL 
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) is a data communications technology that provides fast 
data transmission over copper telephone lines. This connection requires an ADSL router. See 
Learning Unit 5.7.1. 
 
https://www.increasebroadbandspeed.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/conventional-broadband1.png 
7.4.2.2 Fibre 
Fibre is a data communications technology that uses light to transmit data and superfast speeds and 
high capacities. See Learning Unit 5.7.2. 
 
https://www.increasebroadbandspeed.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/fibre-broadband.png 
7.4.2.3 Wireless 
Wireless, or Wi-Fi, does not use telephone lines or cables to connect to the Internet. Instead, it uses 
radio frequency. Wireless is also an always on connection and it can be accessed from just about 
anywhere. 
7.4.2.4 Cellular 
If you are using a SIM Card in your device then you can access the Internet from anywhere. The 
speeds vary depending on the provider, but the most common are 3G and 4G speeds. A 3G is a term 
that describes a 3rd generation cellular network. 4G is the fourth generation of cellular wireless 
standards.  
  

===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 89 
7.5 The World Wide Web (WWW) 
7.5.1 What is the WWW? 
The World Wide Web is a mass of linked web pages which can be accessed via the Internet. The 
hypertext documents can be viewed with a web browser and these pages may contain text, images, 
videos, sound and other multimedia. These pages are linked together, and you can navigate from one 
to another via hyperlinks. Web pages are often dynamically linked to databases and can use the data 
stored in the databases to provide up to date information on the web page. Databases can in turn be 
updated from web pages. 
It is important to note that the Internet and the World Wide Web is not the same thing. While the 
Internet is a global network of interconnected computer networks, the Web runs on the Internet and 
consists of interconnected documents connected by hyperlinks or URLs. 
7.5.2 Web Page and Web Site 
A web page is any document on the Web. These documents can be text only, or contain graphics, 
videos audio and hyperlinks (links to other pages) 
A web site is made up of a number of web pages. A web site is normally created and managed by an 
individual or a company. Hyperlinks can lead you to any page of a web site. A web site always has a 
home page. 
7.5.3 Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 
If you wish to view a web page on the web you will type in the URL of the page into your web browser 
or follow hyperlinks to the page. Each web page on the Internet has a unique address, called the 
URL. Many URLs begin with http://. Http stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol, the protocols or 
rules for communicating on the Internet. Web sites with https:// include the s to indicate that they are 
secure sites and are safer in terms of a user entering private information. 
The format of the URL: 
http://  www  .schoolname.co.za  /High/Academics/tabid/88/Details.html 
 
 
 
 
7.6 Searching the Web 
7.6.1 Web Browser 
A web browser is a program used to locate and view web pages, such as Google Chrome, MS Edge, 
or Mozilla Firefox. The primary function of a web browser is to process HTML code. HTML is the code 
used to design or 'mark-up' webpages. Each time a browser loads a web page, it processes the 
HTML, which may include text, links, and references to images and other items. The browser 
processes these items, then displays them in the browser window. The web browser program also 
provides other features, for example, bookmarks, which allow you to save a link to favourite sites. 
Refresh and navigation buttons and page tabs for multiple searches are all additional functions of a 
web browser. 
  
The path to the 
resource found on 
the server on 
which the web site 
is hosted 
The domain name www points to 
the resource 
the World 
Wide Web 
 
The protocol 
used to 
access the 
resource 
 
===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 90 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
7.6.2 Search Engine 
A search engine is a program that searches documents on the web for specified keywords and 
returns a list of the documents where the keywords were found with hyperlinks to the relevant pages. 
7.6.3 Successful Searching 
To ensure successful searching using a search engine you need to find the balance between making 
your search too general or too specific. The main aim is to reduce the number of returns.  
The best way to search is to: 
• State exactly what you want to find 
• Identify keywords 
• Use synonyms 
ACTIVITY 3 
Different search engines may use slightly different techniques for searching. The following search 
techniques are useful, and they work in Google Chrome. Open Google Chrome and test the search 
results for each of the following: 
 When you are searching for a specific phrase, place it in inverted commas. By doing so you are 
telling the search engine to only search for pages that include these search terms exactly as 
you typed them. Type in the term “IP Addresses” 
 By using the inurl search syntax you can search for words within the URL, for example if you 
type in inurl: network. You will get search results of all sites with network in the web address. 
 Use and to ensure that the search includes both of the items and does not return results for 
only one of them. Type in zoos and South Africa only links for South African zoos will be 
returned. 
 You may wish to limit your search to a specific domain, such as .edu, .org, .gov. Type   site: edu 
“web cams” which will look for web cams in educational sites. 
 Use the Web to find definitions. Type definition: word to define. For example: define: Fake 
News. Write down the definition provided. 
 Test these techniques in a different search engine and compare the results. Different search 
engines return different results. Some search engines specialise in certain genres, for example, 
games or books.  
ACTIVITY 4 
 For your preferred search engine, do a search and write down 5 additional hints which would 
help you to streamline your search. For Google searches the following web page provides tips:  
https://www.lifehack.org/articles/technology/20-tips-use-google-search-efficiently.html 
 Open Google Scholar and do a search on Wolfram Alpha. Write a paragraph to describe what 
Wolfram Alpha is and give a few examples of how it could be useful to you.  
Google Scholar searches return results that are based on research from theses, papers, books and 
written by academics, often from universities. Google Scholar searches will return all scholarly 
research and papers available on the Internet. Google searches do not have to be based on research.  
 Now using Google Chrome or a similar search engine search for Wolfram Alpha and compare 
the search results. 
 There are many different types of search engines, each with their own speciality. Search the 
Internet for five different types of search engines that you could find useful. 
  
===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 91 
7.6.4 Searching using Logical Operators  
Logical Operators allow us to define the logical relationship between search terms. The operators 
used to express the logical relationships are AND, OR and NOT. If we use Logical Operators in our 
Internet searches, we will reduce the number of returns. See Learning Unit 6.2.2. 
In a search query, Boolean logic helps us define the logical relationship between multiple search 
terms. The operators used to express the relationship are AND, OR and NOT. Any number of 
Boolean search terms can be connected with these operators to refine your search results. 
The only case in which you will not use any search logic is when you search for a single item. 
If we search for the following: 
Peanut Butter AND Jelly:     Peanut Butter OR Jelly:        Peanut Butter NOT Jelly: 
 
https://sru.libguides.com/c.php?g=531868&p=4524417 
7.6.4.1 AND 
Using AND will give search results that contain both terms which are searched for.  
For example, if we search for names of rugby players AND names of known South Africans. This 
search will return the names of South African rugby players. 
AND operators are used to limit search results. For every AND you add to your Boolean query the 
fewer results will be returned. 
7.6.4.2 OR 
Using OR will give search results that contain either one or several or all of the search terms.  
For example, if we search for names of rugby players OR names of known South Africans. This 
search will return the names of known players from anywhere in the world as well as the names of 
known South Africans. 
The OR Boolean operator implies that “at least one is required, more than one or all can be returned”. 
For every OR we add to the search query the more results will be returned. 
7.6.4.3 NOT 
Using NOT excludes keywords from your search. Using a NOT is best used when you want to 
exclude some of the search results. 
Note:  While NOT is a valid term in Boolean logic, Google doesn't work with NOT. Instead of NOT, 
you should use the '–' character. Note that there is no space between the dash and the keyword you 
want to exclude.  

===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 92 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
For example, if we search for names of rugby players and NOT  the names of known South Africans. 
This search will return the names of known players excluding all South Africans.  
The NOT operator excludes specific search terms and so the query will not return any results with that 
term, or terms in them. When a search produces many results that are not relevant to the query, 
these results are called false positive results.  
ACTIVITY 5 
Open your search engine and type in the following searches. For each search write down the number 
of results returned. 
 Earth 
 Wind 
 Fire 
 Earth or Wind or Fire 
 Earth and wind and fire 
 Wind not fire (wind –fire) 
 Earth and wind and not fire 
7.6.5 Order of Operations 
Just as you use BODMAS for the order of operations in Mathematics, in Boolean algebra there is also 
a specific order in which a logical statement should be executed.  
Statements in brackets (parentheses) are dealt with first. Thereafter most search engines will give an 
AND precedence over an OR. It is important to remember NOT is a very powerful operator. If you 
include a NOT the “NOTed” term will be excluded before any other statement is evaluated.  
7.6.5.1 Representing a Search as a Logical Expression 
By effectively using the AND, OR, NOT Boolean Operators you can successfully search for exactly 
what you are looking for by refining your search results. Different search engines may use different 
symbols to represent AND, OR, NOT.  
•  + refers to AND  
•  | refers to OR 
• - refers to NOT  
An expression Crime AND poverty AND gender could be entered into a search as "Crime + poverty + 
gender". It could also be written as a function F(C,P,G) = C + P + G where Crime is C, Poverty is P 
and Gender is G. 
An expression Pets NOT cats could be entered as "pets –cats" or F(P,C) = P.C' 
  
===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 93 
EXERCISE 1 
1. Write these expressions as a search expression. You may rearrange the order of the 
statements. 
1.1. Mammals excluding cats and dogs 
1.2. NAND hard drives and SSD hard drives but not flash drives 
1.3. RAM, ROM and BIOS excluding CMOS and male sheep 
1.4. Computer programmer, computer developer or system analyst jobs in South Africa and in 
the USA 
1.5. Computer Science and Computer Engineering degrees in Gauteng or Western Cape.  
2. Write the previous search expressions as functions using Boolean variables. Indicate what each 
variable represents in each function.  
 
7.6.5.2 Evaluating Logical Expressions using Truth Tables 
A truth table can be used to evaluate logical expressions. Suppose the two terms being joined are fish 
and mammals. Each of these terms will have two possible truth values: true, or false. This gives us 
four possible combinations. (22). These are represented on a table, as follows: 
Mammals Fish 
T T 
T F 
F T 
F F 
Now we extend the truth table to include:  Mammals AND Fish,  
 Mammals OR Fish 
Mammals Fish Mammals AND Fish Mammals OR Fish 
T T T T 
T F F T 
F T F T 
F F F F 
Notice: that the Boolean expressions may be true or false depending on the different truth values of 
Mammals and Fish. Thus, if we know what the truth values of Mammals and Fish are, we know what 
the truth value of Mammals AND Fish; Mammals OR Fish is.  
Now consider Europe (Boolean variable E), Paris (Boolean variable P), Amsterdam (Boolean variable 
A) and then we will use a truth table to evaluate the Boolean expression Europe AND (Paris OR 
Amsterdam).  
F(E,P,A) = E . (P + A) 
  
===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 94 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
We first evaluate each separately using a truth table. Note there will be eight possible combinations. 
(23) 
E P A Workings E. (P + A) 
0 0 0 0 . (0 + 0) 0 . (0) 0 
0 0 1 0 . (0 + 1) 0 . (1) 0 
0 1 0 0 . (1 + 0) 0 . (1) 0 
0 1 1 0 . (1 + 1) 0 . (1) 0 
1 0 0 1 . (0 + 0) 1 . (0) 0 
1 0 1 1. (0 + 1) 1 . (1) 1 
1 1 0 1 . (1 + 0) 1 . (1) 1 
1 1 1 1 . (1 + 1) 1 . (1) 1 
F(E,P,A) = EP'A + EPA' + EPA 
Interpreting this function means that the search will return results for documents with Europe, without 
Paris and with Amsterdam, Europe, with Paris and without Amsterdam and Europe, with Paris and 
with Amsterdam. 
EXERCISE 2 
Write the search statements as a function and draw a truth table to determine when the function will 
be true. 
1. Combine the search results of either virus (V) or spam (S) but not hacking (H). 
2. Laptops (L) and desktops (D) but not servers (S). 
3. Any references to by Alan Turing (A) after the second world war (S) but before 1950 (N). 
CHECK POINT 1 
1. What is the Internet? 
2. List THREE basic services of the Internet. 
3. Briefly explain the TCP/IP protocol. 
4. What is a DNS and explain its function by referring to an IP address? 
5. What is a host name and give an example? 
6. What is the format of an IP address and give an example? 
6.1. Convert the IP address 24.3.212.34 to binary 
6.2. In a movie an IP address is given as 112.203.1.256. Why is the address incorrect? 
6.3. Why would a movie provide an incorrect IP address? 
7. What software and hardware would you need to connect to the Internet (besides the computer)? 
8. Name THREE possible ways to connect to the Internet. 
9. Describe the difference between the World Wide Web and the Internet 
10. What is a URL? 
  
===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 95 
11. Define the following terms and give examples of each: 
11.1. Web browser 
11.2. Search engine 
12. Which Boolean operator will give you the most search results?   
12.1. OR 
12.2. AND 
12.3. NOT 
13. Which of these two searches will give you fewer results? 
13.1. (diabetes OR cancer) AND diet 
13.2. (diabetes AND cancer) AND diet 
14. What part of the following will be searched first? South Africa AND (endangered species OR 
protected species)   
14.1. Endangered species 
14.2. South Africa 
14.3. Endangered species OR Protected species  
14.4. Protected species 
15. Why should you be careful about using NOT in your search?   
16. Study the following Venn Diagrams and write down the Boolean expression which was used to 
return the shaded results in each diagram. 
16.1.  
 
16.2.  
 
16.3.  
 
17. Draw a truth table to evaluate the search RAM AND (SSD or HDD). The following headings 
should be used. 
RAM SSD HDD HDD OR SSD RAM AND (HDD or SSD) 
17.1. Write the search as a function. 
17.2. Negate the function using De Morgan's law and then draw a trace table to check if the 
negated function is in fact the opposite of the original function. 
 
  

===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 96 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
7.8 User Interface Design 
The role of the User Interface is to provide a system for a user to interact with a system such as a 
web site or computer program. In Learning Unit 4.1.1.1, we discussed Command Line Interfaces 
(CLI) and Graphical User Interfaces (GUI). A command line interface requires the user to type 
commands to instruct the system. Typed commands require the user to learn a large list of 
commands and these commands can be easily misspelt. A GUI is easier for a user to use since they 
do not need to remember commands and merely click on buttons that contain text or images (icons).   
User interface design focuses on what the user needs to do and has elements that are easy to 
access, understand, and use to carry out the user’s actions easily. Users must be familiar with the 
elements of the interface and so these elements must be consistent, predictable and readable. 
The easier a system is to use, the more likely the user will use it. A good user interface design that is 
easy to use can eliminate errors and provide an experience free of frustration. Constant informative 
feedback also makes an interface easy to use. This means that each time the user clicks on 
something or does something like move a mouse, the Interface should react. If nothing happens, then 
the user will assume the system, button or hyperlink is broken. 
Good user interface design includes consistency, readability, layout, typography or use of colour 
usually embodied in a theme. These principles can be applied to both web sites and computer 
programs. 
7.8.1 Readability  
Good readability focuses on reducing the number of elements on the screen. The elements of the 
interface must be placed in locations that make them easy to see, recognise and use 
Ensure your fonts are readable and will be available in all web browsers. Use dark fonts on light 
background or light fonts on a dark background. 
Use recognisable icons. Most icons are easily understood. A magnifying glass for search, a printer for 
print and a disk to save. Often a combination of both icons and text can be used. 
 
https://help.sonatype.com/repomanager3/files/329993/5412124/1/1509033970164/Screen+Shot+2017-09-13+at+3.14.25+PM.png 
Think of the design of a remote control for a television. If there are 50 buttons and they are not 
logically grouped and properly labelled the average person would have trouble using the remote. A 
remote with few clearly labelled buttons is easier to use. 
7.8.2 Navigation 
The “three-click rule” should be applied to any web site design. A user once, entering a web site, 
should be achieve their purpose in a maximum of three clicks. A user is likely to move to a different 
web site if they cannot satisfactorily easily find what they are looking for. A good search engine could 
also assist a user to find what they are looking for.  

===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 97 
Navigation between pages is usually achieved through menu bars and buttons. These should be in 
the same place on every page. Use headings and a well-structured format so that the user knows 
where they are in your web site. Make certain that the user is able to navigate through your web site 
using hyperlinks or menus. The user must be able to return to the home page from each page or to 
the last page visited. 
 
https://www.elegantthemes.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/000-Web-UI-Design.png 
7.8.3 Typography/Colour 
Ensure your fonts are large enough to be readable and fonts which will be available in all web 
browsers. Use dark colours on light background or light colours on a dark background.  
Use colours in a way that a user would expect. Red is usually associated with danger, yellow is 
associated with caution and green with safety.   
Don't include too many colours in the design. This will make the screen look busy and difficult to read. 
Try limit the colours to at most three with highlights or variations in shade. For example, a hyperlink 
that is not clicked can be light blue and once it has been clicked it can be navy blue. 
7.8.4 Layout 
Keep the layout simple. The more cluttered the page, the more difficult it is to read and use. Try to 
identify what is the most important part of your page or screen and place the important sections where 
a user is likely to look. Use colour, fonts and images to draw the user to important sections. 
7.8.5 Theme 
A theme can be applied to a web site or computer to ensure that all pages or screens have a 
consistent look and feel with the same colours, menus and other components on each page. A theme 
could be set up and applied to each page or screen using software. 
7.8.6 Consistency 
Screen elements that behave the same should be consistent in colour, design and the position on the 
screen. Place buttons that have the same behaviour in the same place on each screen. Elements that 
behave the same should look the same. For example, the Close button should appear the same in 
shape, colour and size and in a similar position on each screen. Screen elements that behave 
differently should look different.  
Elements should be placed on the screen where a user would expect to find them. A user will not 
have a great user experience if they struggle to find what they are looking for on each screen.  
Consistency should also be applied to how the interface appears on various devices. The mobile 
version should have the same them as the desktop version. Whilst the mobile version may not have 

===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 98 Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW 
all the functions of the desktop, the elements that are common to both must behave and appear the 
same. 
 
https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*--4w7QFk8tXKCi1jB8f3RA.png 
7.8.7 Desktop Design vs Mobile Design 
When designing an Interface for a desktop computer, we need to consider that the user has a 
keyboard, mouse and possibly a touch screen. Users will need multiple ways to perform a function. 
For example, to copy an item the user could use the keyboard shortcut keys <Ctrl> + C or select the 
menu option Edit then Copy or right click on the item and select Copy. All three would work 
successfully.  
A mobile device usually has a smaller touch screen, which also functions as a 
keyboard and a mouse. When you create your website or app, you need to 
make sure that you design with all screen sizes in mind. 
The website or app must also load on both low and high bandwidth Internet 
connections.  
Because of computer usage moving more and more to mobile devices we 
have to consider a new rule. Designs have to be finger friendly but more 
specifically thumb friendly. When the phone is held with one hand, the 
thumb carries out the actions. When holding a phone in the right hand, for 
example, the thumb falls naturally in an arc at the bottom left corner of the 
screen. 
https://bigmedium.com/bm.pix/phone-thumb-v2.orig-1000.png 
On tablets the thumb zone changes for different postures. If you are 
sitting, standing or lying down you would use your tablet differently. No 
matter the position the tablet user would access the sides and top 
corners easily. 
 
 
 
 
https://bigmedium.com/bm.pix/tablet-thumb-zone-v2.orig-1000.png 
For touch screen laptops and hybrids, we should cluster the controls around bottom and sides. 

===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 7 Internet and WWW Page 99 
 
 
https://bigmedium.com/bm.pix/hybrid-thumb-zone-v2.orig-1000.png 
CHECK POINT 2 
1. List the principles of Interface design. 
2. The image shows three web pages in the same web site. Each page is different colour. List 
THREE reasons other than colour why these pages are inconsistent. 
 
https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*8vBpuXI1YPe7uCnr.gif 
3. Open you favourite social media app on a desktop computer and a mobile device. 
3.1. List TWO features that are not available on the mobile app? 
3.2. How is the screen arranged on the mobile device compared to the desktop computer? 
3.3. Do the two have a similar theme i.e. look and feel. 
3.4. Is it easy to use the mobile app with one hand? 
3.5. Can you easily use it both your left and right hand? 
4. Design the screen layout of a mobile app to remotely monitor your lights, geyser, front door, 
back door and the temperature of your house.  
4.1. The app must allow the user to log in and log out.  
4.2. Use icons and text appropriately. 
4.3. Would it be necessary to include the architectural layout of the house? 
4.4. Use colour effectively, red indicates danger or a problem and green indicates safety or 
that something is OK.  
5. Find a web site that you think is well designed.  
5.1. Write down the URL. 
5.2. List THREE reasons why you think the page is well designed. 
 
