
===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 28 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
Hardware is categorised into Input, Storage, Processing, Output and Communication. Essentially, 
a computer follows the principle of Input, Processing and Output (IPO) which you will become well 
acquainted with in your programming course. We will look at the essential devices in a computer 
system. 
 
lenoxcomputerstore.com 
3.1 The Motherboard Components 
The motherboard is the large printed 
circuit board (PCB) that houses the 
essential electronic components of a 
device. The central processing unit 
(CPU), primary memory (RAM) and 
connectors between them and other 
peripherals are all linked on the printed 
circuit. 
 
 
 
 
www.gigabyte.com/Motherboard/GA-H61-S3-rev-10#ov 

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 29 
3.1.1 The Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
The CPU consists of the Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU), Control Unit (CU) 
and Registers. 
Many people confuse the System Unit or computer case with the CPU. The 
CPU is the largest chip on the motherboard. The CPU continually interprets 
and executes the commands (or instructions) that are stored in RAM. The 
CPU is square with pins that can be inserted onto the motherboard into a 
socket. 
http://benchmarkreviews.com/images/reviews/processor/Intel_Core_i7/Intel_Core_i7-920_CPU_Splash.jpg 
The design of CPU the in relation to secondary storage and RAM was first developed in 1945 and is 
called von Neumann architecture. All computers have followed this design, where programs and data 
are stored permanently in secondary storage. In order for a program to be run, it must first be loaded 
into RAM, since the CPU is directly connected to RAM.  
 
https://sites.google.com/site/iebitwiki/hardware/cpu/von-neumann-architecture 
3.1.1.1 Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) 
This is an electronic circuit, made up of combinations of logic gates, that performs simple arithmetic 
on integer binary numbers. It can only add the numbers, but, because subtraction is addition of a 
negative number and multiplication is simply repeated addition, division is repeated subtraction and 
exponentiation is repeated multiplication, it all boils down to addition of some sort.  
The ALU also performs all logical calculations. It determines whether a condition will be evaluated to 
be true or false. Logical calculations include relational operators such as >, <, =. Logical calculations 
will be explored in Learning Unit 6.  
3.1.1.2 Control Unit (CU)  
This component is the 'co-ordinator' of program instructions sent to the processor. It controls the 
instructions to be processed by the processor some form of processing cycle that what the processor 
does and how the instruction needs to be processed in terms of the ALU, RAM and input/output 
devices.  
  

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 30 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
3.1.1.3 Registers 
The instructions that are processed by the CPU are stored in small 'memory' holding places called 
Registers. Each Register may hold an instruction, a memory address or data. Registers can also 
refer to other registers as part of their instructions. 
3.1.2 Primary Memory (BIOS, RAM, ROM) 
3.1.2.1 BIOS (Basic Input Output System) 
BIOS is non-volatile firmware (software that is programmed on a ROM chip) used to initialize 
hardware when the computer starts up so that the operating system can take over and use the 
hardware afterwards. 
3.1.2.2 RAM (Random Access Memory) 
Once data has been received as input, it must be stored long enough to 
be processed and if it must be stored permanently, it must be saved to 
secondary storage. RAM and other storage on the motherboard is known 
as primary storage; it is volatile, meaning that the contents or data in 
RAM are constantly changing during processing and is lost when the 
computer is switched off. The type of storage that is non-volatile 
(permanent) is known as secondary storage. 
RAM holds the instruction related data that the user has loaded, and the 
processor will access both when instructed to perform a task. RAM is Dynamic RAM (DRAM) as it 
constantly needs to be refreshed otherwise it will lose its contents. RAM comes in long printed circuit 
boards that can be clipped onto the motherboard. The motherboard can have one, two or four slots 
for RAM. You can easily add more RAM to your computer which can also improve the speed of your 
computer. RAM is part of the computer's primary memory. 
http://www.webanswers.com/post-images/E/EB/1359FE46-16A3-438C-8C986559ADC309E8.jpg 
3.1.2.3 ROM (Read Only Memory) 
ROM is a non-volatile memory chip that can be used to permanently store data in computers and 
other electronic devices, such as BIOS firmware, embedded operating systems and 
appliance/robotics controllers. ROM data can sometimes be changed or not at all, depending on the 
type of chip and its purpose. For example, the ROM chip on a robotics controller may need to change 
data to perform a different task in which case an EEPROM (Electronically Erasable Programmable 
ROM) would be used. An EEPROM can be changed using a software program.  
The chip in some household appliances would never need re-programming, which is suitable for a 
ROM chip where the data/firmware is programmed once when the device is manufactured. 
The term firmware is used to describe software program or set of instructions programmed on a 
hardware device. Firmware is typically stored in the flash ROM of a hardware device. Firmware can 
be thought of as "semi-permanent" since it remains the same unless it is updated by a firmware 
updater. 
3.1.3 Components vs Peripherals 
Input, output and secondary storage devices are peripherals which are connected to the 
motherboard but are not directly placed on the motherboard. In general, anything placed directly on 
the motherboard is considered a component like RAM or the CPU.  
3.2 Secondary Storage 
Secondary storage provides the permanent, non-volatile, storage that keeps data after the device 
has been switched off, for retrieval later. Secondary storage can either be fixed inside a computer or 
removable, known as removable media. The term media is the general word describing what the 

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 31 
data is stored upon. Examples of removable media are external hard drives, flash drives, SD cards 
and CDs. 
3.2.1 Hard Drives 
The hard drive is housed inside the computer case. It stores all the user's programs and data 
permanently.  
3.2.1.1 Mechanical Hard Disk Drives (HDD) 
HDD drives are designed with mechanical 
parts that include a read/write head that 
scans the disk for data that is represented 
magnetically. It is vacuum sealed and stores 
the data magnetically; this ensures that the 
data is not lost after you turn off your 
computer. It also explains why it is not a 
good idea to wave a strong magnet past your 
computer. 
3.2.1.2 Solid State Drives 
(SSD) 
SSDs don't have any moving mechanical 
parts (disks, read/write heads), only 
electronic circuits. Because there are no 
moving parts in an SSD as information is 
stored in microchips, it makes them much 
faster and less susceptible to shock or 
damage. 
SSDs can be either internal or external. 
External SSDs will be considered as 
removable media and will be connected via a 
USB port, which will be discussed later. 
The comparisons alongside clearly indicate 
many of the better efficiencies of SSD's vs 
mechanical HDD's. Although you won't deal 
with many of the specific concepts during 
your IT course, it's worthwhile looking at the 
relative comparisons: 
https://www.gamingscan.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/solid-state-drive-vs-hard-disk-drive.jpg 
Although SSDs outperform HDDs on many levels, the cost per GB is still more favourable for HDDs 
and can still perform successfully on computers where users perform tasks with little demand. 
3.2.1 Hybrid Drives 
Technology has developed to the point where Hybrid drives are used in some systems. This is 
where an HDD is joined with a high-speed flash memory using SSD technology on the same drive, 
to benefit from the efficiencies and cost benefits of both. 
3.2.2 Flash Drives 
A flash drive is a small, very portable storage device that uses solid state 
technology with no moving parts, only electronic circuits. They connect 
conveniently, using a USB port and their small size makes them useful for 
transferring and backing up data. 
www.gearbest.com/usb-flash-drives/pp_260106.html 

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 32 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
3.2.3 Optical Drives 
Optical drives use (laser) light to etch (burn) data onto the disc for reading and writing. The drives that 
are capable of this are CD, DVD and Blu-ray drives. This type of drive has lost popularity to flash 
drives and many devices, particularly laptops, do not include them any longer. 
With higher capacity flash drives available, optical drives are becoming less popular. A CD could only 
store 700MB of data and a single-sided DVD, around 4.5GB. Flash drives of 8 to 16GB are 
commonplace, although the relative cost, per GB, is much higher. Since optical drives use etching on 
a plastic surface to place the data, they are not conducive to changing the data, whereas a flash drive 
can have its data overwritten at will, like a normal hard drive. 
3.2.4 SD Cards 
SD (Secure Digital) cards are very small flash memory cards that provide 
high memory for small size. Used mainly in portable devices like digital 
video camcorders, digital cameras, tablets, audio players and mobile 
phones, they provide 16GB upwards capacities and micro SD cards are 
similar in size to mobile phone SIM cards. 
www.amazon.ca/Memory-Adapter-Mobile-Tablets-Cameras/dp/B01M8L38I2 
 
3.3 Input Devices 
An input device is a hardware device that is used to get data into the computer. This data is stored in 
RAM. The most common input devices are the keyboard and the mouse, although we'll discuss a 
few more. 
3.3.1 Keyboard 
The keyboard consists of many keys that represent characters with a unique value. Most keyboards 
have between 80 to 110 keys divided into sections for: 
• Typing keys 
• A numeric keypad 
• Function keys 
• Control keys  
 
Computer-hardware-explained.com 
The layout of the most common keyboard is called QWERTY, named after the first six letters on the 
top left of the keyboard. 

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 33 
3.3.2 Pointing Device - Mouse  
With the advance of a more graphical display of images and icons on your screen, a pointing device 
like a mouse is needed to select and click on these icons. The mouse detects the change in position 
when it is moved and makes a similar change on the screen. Optical mice have no mechanical parts 
and are reliable - they use a Light Emitting Diode (LED) that bounces light off the mouse pad surface. 
Wireless mice require a receiver to receive signals that are transmitted from the mouse. Devices that 
provide touch screens do not require a mouse to select images and icons. 
3.3.3 Scanners 
A scanner is an input device that analyses an image and converts it to a file. Normally to a .jpg or 
.bmp file. Some scanners provide software called Optical Character Recognition (OCR) that can 
analyse an image that contains text and convert the text into UNICODE so that the text can be altered 
and edited. The better the scanner, the higher the resolution of the image. Scanner resolution is 
measured in dots per inch (dpi). For example, a scanner can be 600x600 dpi.  
Many scanners are combined with multi-function printers. 
3.3.3.1 Barcode Scanners  
Barcode scanners are commonly used to scan the prices of an article at a Point 
of Sale (POS) terminal when you check out at a supermarket. The barcode 
stores information about the product, including a description and a price. The 
barcode reader shines a red LED light onto the black and white barcode pattern 
and then reads the pattern of reflected light. This information can be used to 
update the stock levels and even signal reordering of a product if the company 
is running low on stock. 
http://www.explainthatstuff.com/barcodescanners.html 
A barcode is a simple pattern of thin and wide lines that are decoded by the 
scanner to represent data. 
Barcode scanners can either be handheld devices or could be a scanner 
built into the checkout lane. 
 
 
https://www.scandit.com/types-barcodes-choosing-right-barcode/ 
3.3.3.2 QR Codes 
Quick Response (QR) codes have become increasingly popular as they are easily 
read by the camera of a smartphone. They differ from barcodes as they are two-
dimensional sets of different sized squares on a white background and can 
contain a lot more information. 
 
https://www.qrstuff.com/ 
Both barcode and QR codes can be read and created with many proprietary and free apps that can 
be easily downloaded. 

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 34 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
3.3.3.3 Magnetic Stripe Readers  
Information is encoded on the magnetic stripe of a card or even an 
employee's identification card. The card reader converts the information 
encoded in the magnetic strip into a format that the computer can 
understand. Credit cards and ATM cards are examples of the type of 
cards that can be read by a magnetic stripe reader.  
 
http://www.carolinabarcode.com/pos-system-components-4-a-64.html 
3.3.3.4 Biometric Devices 
Biometrics is a way of uniquely recognising humans, based on their physical characteristics, such as 
fingerprints or retina scans. To recognise a person, the data about a person needs to be stored, such 
as a sample fingerprint, and this sample is used to identify an individual by comparing the stored 
information against the inputted data. If a match is found, then the user has been identified.  
http://www.pcstelcom.com/content.php?parent=25&page=29&section=94 
The most common biometric systems used are 
fingerprints, iris/retinal scans and voiceprints. 
Fingerprints are unique to each person and do not 
change over a life span, except in the case of an injury, 
making fingerprinting the most commonly used 
biometrics. A fingerprint of a person is captured, 
converted to a digital format and represented 
mathematically. Scanners are used to input the 
fingerprint and compared by the computers against the 
stored fingerprint as a form of identification. 
 http://www.pcstelcom.com/content.php?parent=25&page=29&section=94 
The iris scan uses the unique patterns of the iris of the eye (the 
coloured area that surrounds the pupil) as a method of 
recognition. A digital camera is used to take a picture of the iris, 
as well as a picture using near-infrared light to get a clear, high-
contrast picture of a person's iris. This process does not need 
the person to touch the camera. The patterns in the iris are 
analysed and translated into a mathematical expression. Like 
fingerprints, the iris is unique and does not usually change over 
time, making it ideal for biometric identification. The process of 
comparing irises against a database can be done quickly and 
with a high level of accuracy.  
http://www.pcstelcom.com/content.php?parent=25&page=29&section=94 
3.3.4 Microphones 
A Microphone converts sound energy into electrical/digital energy, which is understood by a 
computer. Microphones differ in the way that they convert the energy, but they all use a diaphragm (a 
vibrating membrane) that senses the sound wave and converts it into an electrical signal. 

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 35 
3.3.5 Sensors 
Just as humans can detect the real world though our senses (touch, smell, 
sight, hearing and taste), computers are able to receive information about the 
physical world through sensors.  
A sensor is a device that converts a real-world property into data that a 
computer can process by converting the physical parameter (for example:  
temperature, blood pressure, height, humidity, speed, etc.) into a signal which 
can be measured electrically. In modern ICT technologies, there are many types 
of sensors to measure light, sound or heat, to mention a few.  
In Smart Homes, alarms and other controlling devices respond to these sensors to perform their 
tasks. Many controllers in robotics rely on sensors to make decisions about what the robot must do. 
An interesting form of sensor is an Accelerometer. This sensor gauges the tilting and orientation of a 
smartphone to determine which orientation the phone must show on the screen. 
Sensors are used by computers to detect the real world as input, make decisions and then provide an 
output based on the input. This process occurs in real time meaning the output is adjusted as the 
input is received. A good example is the Autopilot System in aircrafts which consists of several 
sensors which are input to processes like speed, height, position, doors, obstacle, fuel, manoeuvring 
and many more. A computer inputs data from these sensors and processes them by comparing them 
with pre-set values. Based on the decisions made, the computer then signals different parts of the 
aeroplane like engines, flaps, rudders etc. that help in a smooth flight. The combination of sensors, 
computers and mechanics makes it possible to run the plane in Autopilot Mode. 
 
https://www.sparkfun.com/products 
https://www.electronicshub.org/different-types-sensors/ 
  
 

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 36 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
CHECK POINT 1 
1. What is the motherboard? 
2. Which components are connected on the motherboard? 
3. Name the three parts of the CPU. 
4. Explain what the ALU does? 
5. What is the purpose of a register? 
6. Where is a register situated in a computer? 
7. What is the purpose of BIOS? 
8. Why is the CPU connected directly to RAM and not the hard drive? 
9. What is the main difference between an HDD and an SSD? 
10. Mention three reasons why an SSD is more efficient than an HDD. 
11. What is a hybrid drive? 
12. Write down THREE types of optical drives. 
13. Write down TWO devices that would use an SD Card. 
14. What is a QR code? 
15. How does a QR code differ from a barcode? 
16. What device is usually used to read a QR code? 
17. What is a biometric scanner? 
18. Mention TWO items that a biometric scanner can read. 
19. Explain how a microphone works. 
20. Are sensors input or output devices? 
21. What is the purpose of an accelerometer? 
 
3.4 Output devices 
The most common output devices are monitors (screens) and printers. An output device is any 
device that only receives information from the computer – it does not send information to the 
computer. Some modern monitors are touch screens, which is both an input and output device.  
3.4.1 Monitors (Screens) 
The most commonly used monitors are Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) screens. Two important factors 
when choosing a screen are the resolution and the screen size. 
Resolution is the number of picture elements (pixels) on the monitor. Each pixel has its own colour. 
Resolution is defined by the number of pixels across the monitor (rows) 
and the number of pixels down the monitor (columns), such as 1024x768. 
Resolution is affected by several factors, including the size of the screen. 
The size of the screen is measured diagonally across the screen from the 
top left to the bottom right (or vice versa). The measurement does not 
include the casing of the screen. The larger the screen, the higher the 
resolution of the screen. LCD screen sizes are 15, 17, 19 and 21 inches. 
Laptop screen sizes are smaller, typically ranging from 12 to 17 inches. 
http://computer-monitorshop.info/images/viewable-screen-size.jpg 

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 37 
A touch screen, which is used extensively in smartphones and tablets, but also in laptops, allows 
your finger or stylus to emulate a pointing device (mouse) to achieve the same result. A touch screen 
is both an input and an output device.  
3.4.2 Printers 
3.4.2.1 Laser and Inkjet Printers 
Printers come in two types of technologies - laser and inkjet, which print in black and colour or only 
black. Both types of printer are non-impact printers where nothing touches the paper besides the ink 
or toner. Impact printers like the old dot-matrix have a hammer that touched a ribbon on the paper. 
3.4.2.2 3D Printers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.3dhubs.com/s3fs-public/styles/printer_main_picture/public/printer.jpg 
3D printers are a new generation of output devices that can produce different kinds of objects, in 
different materials, all from the same machine. A 3D printer can make anything from ceramic cups to 
plastic toys, metal machine parts, stoneware vases, fancy chocolate cakes or even (one day soon) 
human body parts. 
The process of printing an object is like making a loaf of sliced bread, but in reverse. Imagine baking 
each individual slice of bread and then gluing them together into a whole loaf (as opposed to making 
a whole loaf and then slicing it, like a baker does).  
The 3D printing process turns a whole object into thousands of tiny little slices, then makes it from the 
bottom-up, slice by slice. Those tiny layers stick together to form a solid object. The process to create 
and print a 3D object is usually in two stages.  
• The first is to design the object (normally as a .STL file), although many predesigned objects 
can be downloaded from the Internet.  
• The second stage is to divide the object into thin layers for the printer to print, in a process 
called slicing.  
3D printers give users the ability to design (or download) any type of object and create it.  
(Blieden. G, 2019) 
 
  

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 38 Learning Unit 3 Hardware 
3.4.3 Speakers  
Speakers are commonly used output devices in computer systems. 
They receive audio input (in a digital format) from the computer's 
sound card and produce audio output in the form of sound waves that 
we can hear. Most computer speakers have an internal amplifier which 
allows you to increase the volume, or amplitude, of the sound. 
Speakers usually come in pairs, to produce stereo sound from two 
separate audio channels. 
 
https://pc.net/glossary/definition/speakers 
https://www.informationq.com/about-the-basic-parts-of-a-computer-with-devices/ 
3.4.4 Headphones 
Headphones and speakers are the exact opposite of microphones, using the same technology, in 
reverse. Both use a diaphragm to convert the digital data into sound waves. Speakers are used to 
project the sound over a wide area while headphones are connected to a band that fits your head and 
only provides adequate sound quality to the person who is wearing the headphones. Headsets are 
combinations of microphones and headphones that are used effectively by call centre agents, gamers 
and others that need to speak and listen simultaneously but are essentially two different devices that 
are attached to the same headband for convenience. 
3.5 Ports 
All the Input and Output devices mentioned above need some sort of connecting port to be able to 
communicate with the computer/device that is appropriate for the device to send or receive the right 
data. Although microphones and speakers may use jack plugs to connect via a sound card, most of 
the devices (including speakers and microphones) use more versatile and universal ports known as 
USB and HDMI. The reason for using such universal ports is to reduce the number of ports needed 
on a computer for all the devices that may need to connect. Most modern computers only present 
USB and HDMI ports for device connection; while LAN ports can still be found, it is possible to use a 
LAN/USB adapter. 
3.5.1 Universal Serial Bus (USB) Port 
A Universal Serial Bus (USB) is a common interface that enables communication 
between devices and a host controller such as a personal computer. It connects 
devices such as digital cameras, mice, keyboards, printers, scanners, media 
devices, external hard drives and flash drives. Because of its wide variety of 
uses, including support for electrical power, the USB has replaced a wide range of 
interfaces like the parallel and serial port. 
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/2320/universal-serial-bus-usb 
https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/u/usb.htm 
3.5.2 High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) Port 
High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) ports provide a 
digital interface to receive and transmit both video and audio 
signals. These ports have replaced the older graphics VGA port 
and sound jack port and can transmit data from many source 
devices to numerous display monitors. 
The HDMI port looks like a USB port, but it has tapered edges at 
the bottom. 
https://stankikursk.ru/hdmi-port/ 

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 3 Hardware Page 39 
CHECK POINT 2 
1. Secondary storage is said to be non-volatile and primary storage is said to be volatile. What 
is the difference between volatile and non-volatile storage? 
2. Why does a computer need to have volatile and non-volatile storage? 
3. Copy and complete the following table to indicate whether the component mentioned is an 
input or output component: 
Component Input/Output 
Monitor  
Keyboard  
Scanner  
Headphone  
Microphone  
4. What are the TWO most common types of printers? 
5. How is the size of a monitor measured? 
6. What is a standard size of monitor available today for a desktop? Laptop? 
7. What is the resolution of a screen/monitor? 
8. Look up and write down the resolution of the screen you are currently using on your computer. 
9. Name the TWO ports that are most commonly used to connect peripherals to computers today. 
10. Why have computer manufacturers reduced the number of ports for connection of peripherals? 
11. How does a headset differ from a headphone? 
 
  