
===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 40 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
Learning Unit 4 System 
Software 
System software consists of the operating system, utilities, compilers and drivers. 
4.1 Parts of System Software 
4.1.1 Operating Systems 
Operating systems are a large part of system software. Operating systems usually provide several 
management and housekeeping tools and utilities that allow the user, normally with administrative 
permissions, to configure the computer to run as efficiently as possible, according to the user(s) 
needs. The specific management tools, housekeeping tools and utilities may differ in appearance and 
location for different operating systems, but they generally provide similar tools and utilities. 
Every computer needs to have an operating system installed and running on it. The kernel is loaded 
when the computer is turned on. Every operating system has three main functions: 
• Provide a user interface 
• Load and run programs 
• Manage the computer's resources 
4.1.1.1 The User Interface 
Command Line Interface 
Early operating systems, such as MS DOS, used a text-based interface, with commands being typed 
at the command prompt. Linux today provides both a GUI and a text interface.  
 
https://www.ictlounge.com/html/operating_systems_new.htm 
  

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 41 
Graphical User Interface 
The operating system provides a user interface for a person to communicate with the computer. Most 
operating systems provide a Graphical User Interface (GUI), with Windows, Icons, Mouse Control and 
pull-down menus (WIMP). Smart devices, tablets, some lapbooks and computers have a touch screen 
which allows a stylus or finger pressure to replace the pointing device. 
 
https://www.ictlounge.com/html/operating_systems_new.htm 
4.1.1.2 Load and Run Programs 
The operating system loads, runs and controls application programs. 
4.1.1.3 Resource Management 
The operating system manages the computer's resources, such as the CPU, the RAM, the monitor, 
storage devices, the keyboard, mouse and printer. It controls all the activities taking place in the 
computer. It controls: 
• Input and Output (I/O) by helping the user interact with the computer through the monitor, 
keyboard, and mouse by hiding the details of how these devices work. 
• File Management by allowing users to create, save, delete, move, and copy files onto 
secondary storage such as hard disk or flash drive or clouded storage. 
• Memory management by making sure that each program loaded by the user has enough 
memory allocated to it and no two programs use the same memory space. 
• Process management. A program in memory can, in simple terms, be referred to as a process. 
The operating system must make sure each process will get enough CPU time in order to run 
successfully. Remember that the user may have many programs loaded and could be running 
them at the same time. 
4.1.2 Drivers 
The operating system uses the device drivers to link a hardware device to the software in such a way 
that the computer can perform its tasks when applications need to send instructions to the particular 
hardware device. 
Every device connected to a computer system has a small, specific program called a driver that 
provides the operating system with information needed for it to work with that device. There can be 
more than one driver programs that can be used with a device, but the more up to date the driver 
program is, the better it will make the device work.  

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 42 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
 
http://cs.sru.edu/~mullins/cpsc100book/module05_SoftwareAndAdmin/module05-02_softwareAndAdmin.html 
In the above diagram, a user can interact with an application or directly the operating system or 
utilities. The Control Panel and Task Manager are two programs that allow the user to manage and 
control the operating system and utilities. When a user interacts with an application program, the 
application program interacts with the operating system which in turn communicates with a driver 
which communicates with the hardware.  
For example, if a user, working in word processing application, prints a document, the word 
processing program communicates with the operating system. The operating system sends the file to 
the driver which translates the document into a format that the printer can understand. If the user 
wishes to print a spreadsheet, which is a different application package, on the same printer, the same 
driver would be used. 
4.1.3 Programming Tools and Related Applications 
A programming tool is simply anything that is classified as a computer program that can be used to 
create programs that work on their own, support other programs or applications and/or interact with 
the resources on a device. The IDE (Integrated Development Environment) that you use when you 
write code in your programming course is a programming tool. Most of these tools use an IDE that 
consists of a source code editor and a compiler or interpreter with other add-ons that make the 
environment easy to work with to develop applications. Some IDEs support multiple programming 
languages. For example, NetBeans IDE supports Java desktop, mobile, and web applications, PHP 
and C/C++ development and more.  
Game development applications such as Unity give developers the ability to create both 2D and 3D 
games for multiple platforms such as Android, iOS and Windows Phone. Detailed tutorials are 
provided to help new developers learn how to code games for any type of device. 
https://unity3d.com/learn/tutorials 
Mobile app development can be complex considering the different platforms on which the app must 
execute. Cross-platform mobile app development tools support the concept of write once, run 
anywhere (WORA). The developer writes code once on any one platform and runs it on multiple 
platforms. These tools save time and effort on the part of the developer. For example, Codename 
One and PhoneGap. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 43 
4.1.3.1. Source Code vs Executable Code 
Source code is the original code written by the programmer. In Delphi the file name will have a .pas 
extension and in Java the file will have a .java extension. The source code is compiled to a separate 
file called object code which is the executable code. In Delphi this file will end in .exe and in Java it 
will end with .class. In Windows all files ending with .exe can be executed, hence exe. A .class file 
cannot be directly executed in Windows unless a Java Runtime Environment (JRE) is installed.  
 
https://techblogmu.blogspot.com/2017/03/define-compiler-interpreter-assembler.html 
4.1.4 Utilities 
System software provides many utilities to help a 
user manage, analyse, maintain, optimise and 
control their computer. As you can see from the 
graphic alongside, there are many utilities available 
in the Control Panel area of most operating 
systems. The Control Panel is a program that is 
part of your system software to perform such tasks. 
We will explain the following utilities in this Learning 
Unit: 
• Defragmentation 
• Scheduling tasks 
• Updating 
• File compression and extraction 
• Archive 
• Backup 
• Install and uninstall software 
• Security – firewall and anti-malware 
4.1.4.1 Defragmentation 
A Disk Defragmenter rearranges fragmented data 
on a mechanical hard disk so your disk can work more efficiently. This might take several minutes to a 
few hours to finish, depending on the size and degree of fragmentation on the disk and 
defragmentation may be impossible if there is not enough space to create a copy of the files being 
rearranged.  
Note that flash drives and solid-state drives do not need to be defragmented as they do not have 
moving parts. The speed of loading and saving files is not compromised. The Task Scheduler and 
other utilities will be discussed later in this Learning Unit. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 44 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
4.2 Software Distribution and Licensing Models 
A software license legally describes how software can be used and copied. It protects the copyright 
of the software. Copyright laws establish that the authors of the software have ownership of the 
software. The software license is often controlled by a program called a license manager that will 
enforce the license terms to protect the software vendor from piracy. Piracy being the illegal copying 
of software. Most software that is bought off the shelf has the license included with the software. This 
license will normally restrict the copying of the software onto multiple machines. 
Software licenses are varied but can be grouped into two main types: proprietary or free and open 
source licenses. 
4.2.1 Proprietary License 
This license does not allow the software to be freely distributed or copied. This is usually achieved 
using product or activation keys. More importantly, it does not give you access to the source code. 
When you buy software, you are buying the rights to use that software normally described in an End 
User Licence Agreement (EULA), this model is used by Microsoft for most of its products. Purchasing 
one of the packages does not entitle you to load the software on more than one machine unless you 
have a multiple licence agreement.  
4.2.2 Free and Open Source License 
As the name indicates, open source licenses share the source code of the software; and are referred 
to as copyleft licenses. These are in direct contrast to proprietary licenses that try to restrict the 
user's use of the software. An example of copyleft free software is General Public License (GNU) 
which gives the user permission to change, modify and even redistribute the software. The user is 
obliged to include the source code when the software is redistributed so that others can use the new 
improvements. This provides a community that contribute to a software product sharing the 
enhancements. A typical example of this type of software licence is Linux.  
Within the free and open source licensing models, there are several sub-categories: 
4.2.2.1 Creative Commons License 
A Creative Commons license allows you to keep the copyright of your work but still allows people to 
copy and distribute your work on condition they acknowledge your work. This form of licensing is in 
response to the wave of collaboration that has occurred through the Internet, in particular Web 2.0. 
Whilst you want to share your ideas, you would still like to be acknowledged for your contribution. 
4.2.2.2 Freeware  
Freeware software is software that is copyrighted but given away by the author without any cost for a 
user to use, but not to resell. The author still retains the copyright, which means that you cannot alter 
it as you are not given the source code. This software is usually available on the Internet. 
www.genderit.org/en/index.shtml 
4.2.2.3 Freemium Software 
Freemium software is a variant of freeware where limited functions are provided free at no cost, but 
additional or more advanced features incur a cost. The user normally pays for a licence key that 
unlocks the additional features. 
www.netc.org/openoptions/appendices/glossary.html 
 
  
===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 45 
CHECK POINT 1 
1. List THREE functions of an operating system. 
2. What does WIMP mean in a GUI? 
3. What is a command line interface? 
4. Name TWO other parts of system software besides the operating system. 
5. Look up and write down the latest versions of iOS, Android, Windows, MacOS and Linux. 
6. What is the purpose of utility programs? 
7. Name THREE utility programs 
8. What does the Disk Defragmentation program do? 
9. Why are utility programs not considered to be application programs? 
10. What is a device driver? 
11. Explain the difference between source code and executable code.  
12. What is a programming IDE? 
13. Why do companies provide license agreements with their software? 
14. There are a number of license schemes listed in this book, list FOUR of them and explain each 
one. 
15. What is creative commons licencing? How does it differ from freeware? 
16. What is freemium software and give TWO examples. 
 
4.3 Structuring Data in Secondary Storage 
The next two sections provide practical activities to manage, analyse, maintain, optimise and control 
their computer. 
4.3.1 User Profile 
Each User Profile (on a computer that allows more than one user) will have 
a unique profile that includes Documents folder, Pictures folder, Desktop 
and many others. When a user logs onto the computer, these folders will 
contain files that relate to that user. 
The user logs on using a username and password and he/she can 
personalize and customize settings such as Desktop Theme and the 
structure of files/folders and shortcuts on the Desktop. Only an administrator 
or the user can make changes to his or her profile; no other users have 
access to a user's profile. Users only have access to their own profiles and 
applications/folders that are installed that the administrator gives them 
permission to access. Usually, users don't have permission to perform 
many of the Control Panel (like adding or deleting programs) or System 
Settings functions. However, there may be a Public Profile on a computer 
where the documents can be shared by all the users. 
The desktop is one of the folders that is linked to a particular user. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 46 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
4.3.2 Desktop 
Any operating system that makes use of a GUI will, no doubt, have a Desktop, for each user profile in 
a multi-user environment. The desktop is the first window that appears after a user logs on. Like the 
top of an actual desk, it serves as a surface for your work. When you open programs or folders, they 
open on the desktop. You can also put things on the desktop, such as files, folders and short-cuts, 
and arrange them in any order. If you minimize or close all of the running applications and open 
documents on your computer, you end up back at the Desktop. 
The Desktop usually includes the taskbar at 
the bottom of the screen. It shows you which 
programs are running and allows you to switch 
between them; it also contains the Start button 
that you can use to access programs, folders, 
and computer settings. You can easily pin an 
application to the taskbar if you use it often or if 
you want it to start straight away when your 
profile is loaded. The picture alongside shows 
the expanded start menu if you click on the 
Start button. To go back to the Desktop, you 
can simply press 'Esc'. 
https://www.techonia.com/5219/windows-10-pro-technical-preview-screenshots/windows-10-desktop-expanded-start-menu 
4.3.2.1 Desktop Management 
As was mentioned before, you can pin applications and files or folders to the taskbar for easier 
access. You can also add files, folders and shortcuts to the Desktop itself; however, except for 
shortcuts, this is not advisable for several reasons: 
• When a user logs on, one of the first things that the profile loads is the desktop. If the desktop 
has large files or folders on it, the logon will be much slower. 
• A mixture of files, folders and shortcuts on the desktop causes it to become cluttered and 
difficult to see where everything is. Rather leave shortcuts only on the desktop and place files 
and folders elsewhere within your profile. 
• If the operating system needs to be reinstalled, the user desktops may be deleted, and files and 
folders may be lost. 
4.3.3 Management of Files and Folders 
A file structure is necessary for the computer to know where files are stored. A computer uses a 
hierarchical structure to make this orderly and functional: 
 

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 47 
The highest level is the drive which is the physical hard drive. 
The drive may have any number of immediate child folders 
and the folders may also have many sub-folders. Files live in 
these folders and the drive\folder\folder… address is known 
as the path of any file. 
In a GUI based operating system, a utility exists to view, edit, 
save and delete folders and files, usually named as the File 
Explorer utility.  
A real folder tree (on the left) shows sub-folders indented below 
their parent folders. Folders on the same level of indentation are not 
sub-folders of one another. Files are saved in the existing folders 
and these files may be created, moved, edited and/or deleted using 
the 'Save' or 'Save As' options in some applications, or by using the 
menu options. Files and folders may not have the same names 
within the same folder, but most operating systems will warn the 
user if such an attempt is made and it will offer the option of creating 
a copy of the file/folder with a different name. 
 
 
4.3.3.1 Cloud-Based Storage 
Cloud-based storage also needs to be managed in the same way, as it 
is an extension of your secondary storage. Cloud storage is simply data 
that is stored remotely (off your computer) as opposed to locally (on your 
computer). The storage is accessible through the Internet and 
applications such as Google File Stream, iCloud and Dropbox allow the 
folders on your computer to synchronise with the clouded storage. Some 
applications make copies, others don't (Google File Stream does not). 
The image alongside shows the synchronised and cloud-based drives in 
the Quick access area of Windows Explorer. A user can have multiple 
cloud-based storage areas provided they install the relevant software. 
The software will allow the user the convenience of treating the cloud 
storage as a folder on their local storage 
https://download.parallels.com/desktop/v13/docs/pt_BR/Parallels%20Desktop%20User%27s%20Guide/37237.htm 
4.3.3.2 Sharing and Permissions Cloud-Based vs Local 
On a local computer, access to folders and files is controlled 
by the default profile settings of the operating system and the 
administrator. Sharing and Permissions can be set on 
folders and files that exist on multi-user computers with user 
profiles for each user on the local computer or on files and 
folders on servers connected by the network. 

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 48 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
A user can allow other users access to a folder by right clicking on the folder and selecting Properties 
and the sharing tab. In the diagram alongside, the folder called Creative is not shared, but access can 
be allowed by clicking the Share… button. 
 
 
 
Once the Share... button has been clicked, a window is 
displayed displaying the users or group of users that have 
access to the folder. The permissions that each user has 
ranges from Full Control, Modify, Read & Execute, List folder 
contents, Read and Write.  
 
 
 
 
Google Drive is a good example of how cloud sharing can be 
managed. The person who created a shared folder is the owner and can add users (by adding their 
email addresses to a newly created folder or an existing one): 
 
 
 
 
Using the dropdown on the edit option (on the right), the owner can provide permissions such as 
organise, add & edit or view only. 
 
4.3.4 Compressing and Decompressing Folders and Files 
4.3.4.1 Compression 
File compression programs reduce the size of files, so they take up less storage space or can be 
transferred more quickly over the Internet. Compression applications make use of advanced 
programming techniques to reduce file sizes. Common examples are WinZip, 7-Zip and WinRAR and 
recent versions of Windows have a built-in file compression utility. While text files compress 
successfully, images do not allow for a high degree of compression. 
You can work with compressed files and folders in the same way that you work with uncompressed 
files and folders. You can also combine several files into a single compressed folder, making it easier 
to share a group of files, since you only need to attach one file to an email message instead of several 
files. If you transfer files over the Internet, you will save significantly on bandwidth by transferring 
smaller compressed files. 

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 49 
Remember, from the 
previous section, if you are 
using clouded storage with 
the correct permissions in 
place, there is no need to 
compress and email as an 
attachment – users have 
shared access to the 
relevant files. 
The original folder called 
'Bingo' consists of files 
amounting to 9.61MB in 
size and was compressed 
to 4.363MB which is much smaller. 
4.3.4.2 Decompression of Extraction 
All compression utilities contain a decompression utility to extract the compressed file. 
A very convenient feature in the Windows environment allows you to use the 'Send To' option (right-
click on a folder) to create a compressed file; this creates a compressed, single file, of the entire 
folder which will be considerably smaller than the original folder and can be sent as an attachment in 
an email as a single file. Google Drive, interestingly, will download a compressed file to your computer 
automatically when you select the download option. 
4.3.5 Archive and Backup 
4.3.5.1 Archiving 
As folders and mailbox folders are filled 
with constant additions, many files stay 
resident without being used over long 
periods of time. This causes unnecessary 
space to be occupied, but it may be 
necessary to keep the files for future 
reference. By using an archiving utility, you 
can remove the files and store them in a 
compressed separate archive location for 
space saving and later use.  
4.3.5.2 Backup 
Backup is a way of making a copy of files or folders in case of data loss to a separate location. 
Backup locations include remote (cloud storage), local drives, network drives or external drives. A 
backup is usually made of data files but can include applications and possibly entire operating 
systems or drives. A backup protects the user in case their normal place of storage becomes 
unusable due to damage, space restrictions or corruption. Backing up may take the form of simple 
copying or using compression before copying.  
The backup utility usually has options for: 
• The types of files to be backed up 
• How often the data is backed up 
• Whether previous backups should be overwritten, or not 
• Setting a backup schedule from within the utility 
• Saving the backup settings for future use 
Some operating systems offer a separate system backup facility that allows users to restore the 
system to a previous stable state should the system, for any reason, become unstable.  

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 50 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
ACTIVITY 1 
 Select a folder on your hard-disk and check the folder size by right-clicking and selecting 
Properties.  
 Create a compressed file of the folder by right-clicking, selecting Send To and then select 
Compress File.  
 Check the size of the compressed file. How does it compare to the size of the original folder? 
4.4 System Management 
4.4.1 Installing and Uninstalling Software 
When you obtain new software, a dedicated program called the installation program is used to 
install the program so that it is ready to be used. Today, operating systems make use of a registry to 
record settings and changes that affect the system when installations take place. An installer program 
takes care of placing the executable files, creating folders for the supporting software and registering 
the necessary software in the registry, so that the application will run successfully. 
Some software products allow the user to have options in the way the product is installed.  
• If you are going to only use the standard 
features of the software package, then a 
typical/standard installation can be chosen.  
• If you need to adapt the way the software will be 
installed and change settings, a custom 
installation can be used.  
• Finally, if you want to use all the features then a 
full installation is recommended. Obviously, a 
full installation will take up more hardware space 
than a typical installation. 
If the software is licensed, then you will need to enter 
a product key which is a unique code that ensures 
that the software was purchased legally, and the 
product is licensed to you. This can also be referred to 
as an activation key (activation code) as it activates 
the software so it can be run. 
Google and Office 365 may have licenses attached to email addresses (pay per month per email 
address) although you don't need to install anything because you are using a cloud-based version on 
the Internet. 
Uninstall programs safely remove all parts of programs from your computer system by removing all 
files, folder and icons and updating the registry. In a typical Windows environment, the Control Panel 
has a Programs and Features option that allows you to uninstall or modify an installed program. 
 
  

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 51 
4.4.2 Adding Devices and Drivers 
Previously, if an operating system did not have the driver for a device pre-loaded, CD's were used to 
load the drivers into the operating system. Drivers loaded on a CD have become somewhat unpopular 
and are often not the latest version. Most drivers that are not provided with a device are downloadable 
from the Internet.  
Devices, such as 3G cards and flash drives, have the driver 
software embedded on the device and are installed together 
with any application software when the device is connected to 
the computer for the first time. Modern operating systems have 
a plug and play feature meaning that they detect new 
hardware as soon as it is connected to the computer system, 
and then lead the user through a series of steps, or no user 
intervention is required at all. The driver program is then 
installed and the settings for the device are stored on the 
computer. If the device is hot swappable it means that it can 
be successfully installed without restarting the computer. Most 
USB devices are hot swappable. 
 
4.4.3 Scheduling and Updating 
4.4.3.1 Scheduling 
A task scheduler utility may exist in the operating system on your computer. This utility allows you to 
run programs automatically at specified times with specified conditions, allowing the system to update 
and/or process configurations in the background while you are running the computer. You can 
schedule just about any task involving an application or utility that is resident on the computer. For 
example, you can schedule a backup when you shut down or to run at a certain time. 
ACTIVITY 2 
 Plan a backup procedure for the data on your computer. Choose the files to be backed up, how 
often the backup must run and where the files must be copied.  
 Locate the Task Scheduler utility on your computer and execute the backup you planned above. 
4.4.3.2 Updating 
Older operating systems, especially the Windows™ environment, used to update their operating 
system software by means of service packs which were distributed on CD; today, most updating is 
done over the Internet where a scheduled task is set to check on the vendor update site for available 
update downloads. You may choose, in the operating system's update utility, whether you want to 
update automatically or only when you request the download. Java and Windows make updates 
available on a regular basis and, if the system is not configured to automatically update, a pop-up 
window usually appears to inform the user that updates are available.  
 

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 52 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
The update utility may include a scheduling option which works independently of the operating 
system's scheduled tasks. 
Google, however, is not actually installed on a computer; it is essentially a website where the update/s 
are done on the Google site and when the user next opens the application using their browser the 
updates are already done. That way a user can't refuse to have the update but may choose to use the 
previous product version before the update is enforced. 
4.5 Security Features 
4.5.1 Firewall 
A firewall is a device or set of devices designed to permit 
or deny network transmissions based upon a set of rules 
and is used to protect networks from unauthorised 
access and permitting legitimate communications only. 
Many computer operating systems provide software-
based firewalls to protect against threats from the 
Internet. Firewalls and routers are explained in more 
detail in Learning Unit 5. 
 
4.5.2 Malware  
Malware, or malicious software, is any program or file 
that is harmful to a computer. Malware includes computer 
viruses, spyware and adware. 
4.5.2.1 Virus 
Before Internet connectivity was popular, viruses were transferred by inserting an infected disk (flash, 
from an infected computer) into a computer; since Internet connectivity has become commonplace, 
transferring viruses has become a lot easier, from bogus Internet sites and email attachments. 
Viruses are programs, illegally loaded onto a computer, that cause damage to the system. They can 
modify themselves to avoid detection and can spread from one computer to another via removable 
media or downloading from the Internet. This is done by infecting files on the computer to which they 
have been downloaded, or by attaching themselves to outgoing emails. Some viruses can even send 
themselves to all email addresses found in the computer's email program's address book.  
4.5.2.2 Spyware 
Spyware is computer software that is installed surreptitiously on a personal computer to intercept or 
take partial control over the user's interaction with the computer, without the user's informed consent. 
One form of spyware is a keystroke-logging program. This program can be used to record each 
keystroke of the user of an infected computer and then transmits this data via the Internet to the white 
collar criminal responsible for its creation. The criminal then reconstructs the relevant login data and 
passwords used by the original computer and so can gain illegal access to other people's bank 
accounts, for example. 
4.5.2.3 Adware 
Adware is unwanted and annoying software that automatically displays or downloads to a computer. 
An example of adware is popup windows that display while you are surfing the Internet. Adware is 
usually benign software which can slow down the operation of your computer. They access cookies, 
small text files containing personal data, stored by the Internet browser to customise the displayed 
adverts according to the activity detected in the browser. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
 Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Learning Unit 4 System Software Page 53 
4.5.3  Anti-Malware 
Anti-malware are programs necessary to safeguard from malicious threats commonly. One strategy 
for protecting a computer against malware is to prevent the malware software from gaining access to 
the computer. Antivirus software and firewalls (which will be discussed in Learning Unit 5) are 
strategies used to help protect a computer against the introduction of malware as well as checking for 
the presence of malware and malicious activity and recovering from attacks. 
4.5.3.1 Anti-Virus 
As viruses become more complex and difficult to trace, anti-virus software needs to be continuously 
updated to find the signature, an identifying piece of code embedded in the virus program, and take 
appropriate action, usually to delete or quarantine the offending file, depending on its severity. Any 
good anti-virus software should be able to supply features such as: 
• Updating the signature database from the Internet; 
 
https://www.getavast.net/support/update 
• Offering a variety of protection categories, such as network security, email security and 
computer protection; for example, network security offers protection against malware in the 
traffic on you network, email security offers protection for emails and their attachments and 
computer protection offers protection for the files and folders on the computer. External (flash) 
drives that attach to a computer can be scanned as soon as they become attached. 
• A variety of scanning options: Full system, selected drives or even individual files. 
 
Scanning a computer for malware can take a long time, most anti-virus software will provide a 
variety of options to scan select devices, limit the scan to recent activity or scan all local drives.  

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
Exploring IT: Theory Grade 10 
Page 54 Learning Unit 4 System Software 
CHECK POINT 2 
1. What is a user profile? 
2. What is a desktop? 
2.1. Why is it not a good idea to store files and folders on your desktop?   
2.2. What is a better option? 
3. Why will each user that logs onto a system have a different desktop?  
4. A user logs onto a computer and the log on process takes a very long time. What could be the 
problem? 
5. What does a scheduler do? 
6. Explain the difference between an archive and back up. 
7. Where would you store your backup files so that the backup will be reliable? 
8. Why is it important to allow Windows to update your computer's system software?   
8.1. What if you do not have an Internet connection? 
9. How does a firewall protect your computer? 
10. What is malware? 
11. Name THREE categories of protection that are available from a good ant-virus software. 
12. What scanning options would you expect from good anti-virus software? 
13. List the advantages and disadvantages of cloud-based storage. 
14. List the benefits and dangers of sharing files stored in the cloud. 
15. Anti-virus and Internet security programs protect computers against what type of attacks? 
16. Why is it important to uninstall a program? 
17. Devices and drivers: 
17.1. Which is software? 
17.2. Which is hardware? 
17.3. What does hot swappable mean? 
17.4. Which port do hot swappable devices use? 
17.5. Where would you find the driver for a new device? 
 